<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="47">
CHAPTER XLVII.
The picture which my distracted fancy thus set before the
eye of my mind, was not altogether verified in the event.
After a thousand fruitless inquiries and perquisitions, I
found, to my utter astonishment, that Charles, arresting
his career at the town of Fribourg, had returned upon his
steps, and sought a second time the metropolis of Austrian
Hungary. This was of the class of those events which we
sometimes meet with in the world, that baffle all calculation,
and strike us like magic, or like madness, in their
authors.
I had nothing to do, as I conceived, on this occasion,
but to follow the example of my son, and like him to resume
the route of Presburg. I yet hoped to witness, if not to
co-operate in, the reconciliation of Charles and Pandora.
My spirits in this respect were revived, and my prospects
made brighter, by the thoughts that these virtuous and
meritorious lovers were at last likely to be once again inclosed
within the cincture of the same city. Add to which,
my Venetian confederate had not yet made his appearance
at Presburg; and not only was I under engagements to
give him the meeting there, but it was also clear that his[468]
errand could not be brought to its proper close without my
assistance.
I once more entered the city to which Pandora owed
her birth. Charles de Damville had preceded my arrival
several days. I should without delay have repaired to his
apartments, but that I found at my own lodgings a letter
from Benedetto Cabriera of Venice, informing me that he
was now in Presburg, and to avoid all cause for suspicion,
had taken up his residence in a remote quarter of the
town. From the enquiries I made, I became satisfied
that my son had in some degree resumed his usual occupations,
and that there was no appearance of his again immediately
quitting the metropolis. I therefore felt my transaction
with Cabriera more urgent than an immediate
conference with Charles. Though I had sought that conference
with earnest expedition, yet I dreaded it. It might
require the maturest consideration and the nicest management,
to render it effectual for the purposes I sought. I
found from certain intelligence that Damville and Pandora
had yet had no explanation with each other. I therefore
regarded my exertions for that purpose as a final effort;
and I was willing that every thing should be in train, and
the portion of Pandora fully adjusted, before I entered
upon that interesting scene. With Cabriera I had little
difficulty. The documents and evidences of his tale we
had concerted at Venice; and I presently found that he
told his story so plausibly, and supported it so consistently,
that it was admitted by every one without the smallest
suspicion.
No sooner had Cabriera opened his business to the parties
to whom the cognisance of it most properly belonged,
than I once more presented myself to the beautiful and engaging
niece of Nadasti. The instant I entered her apartment,
I was shocked with the extreme change of her personal
appearance. All the airiness, alertness and vivacity,
that had once so exquisitely adorned her, were gone. The
roses in her cheek were faded, and had given place to a delicate,
but sickly paleness. Her arms, though always what
is called white, had before been round, and had been distinguished
by the purest hue of health. They were now[469]
emaciated, skinny, and colourless. Her eyes were hollow,
and her eyelids inflamed with weeping. All these changes
had taken place in about five weeks that had elapsed since
I saw her last. I was so struck with the sight, that I involuntarily
started, and could scarcely command myself
enough to refrain from tears. It was plain that she carried
an arrow in her bosom, which one hand only in the
universe could extract with safety. As I approached, she
raised her lovely head that had been depressed with grief,
and lifted her white arms with an expression of despair.
“Come nearer, my sweet Henry,” said she, “I rejoice
to see you; though you have proved my worst enemy, the
destroyer of my peace. But your intentions, my kind boy,
my brother, for such I will still call you, have always been
good and innocent. But, ah, Henry, you have deluded
me; you urged me to banish despair; and every day I see
more reason to despair.”
I asked if she had not seen the chevalier since his return
to Presburg.
“It were better for me,” replied Pandora, “if I had
not seen him. What has really happened, is worse than if
I had been denied to see him. I have met him every day
in the apartments of my aunt. To an indifferent eye it
would have appeared as if he neither sought nor avoided
me. He carries himself towards me with a cold and constrained
civility. But he neither demands an interview,
nor allows me the opportunity to utter a word to him in
private. Oh, D’Aubigny, I see too well that I have lost
him for ever. When he fled my presence, when he resolved
to seek some distant region, cruel as that conduct was, it
convinced me that I was of some importance to him. But
now he passes by me in stern neglect; he has utterly driven
me from his heart. Indeed, my brother, this last blow is
too much; I feel that I shall never recover it.”
“And does the chevalier,” cried I, “appear at his ease?
Does he exhibit the wonted symptoms of his health and
triumphant spirit?”
“Away; too pleasing deluder!” replied Pandora.
“Cheat me not with false hopes! flatter me not with unreal
expectations! Damville does not appear to be well or[470]
happy. But you have deceived me too much; the disappointments
that you prepared for me are too excruciating.
I feel now at no time so high a degree of gloomy satisfaction
and composure, as when I press despair firmly to
my breast.
“But you, Henry,” continued she, “are probably uninformed
of my last and severest misfortune. I had a great
uncle in the list of the adventurers that achieved the conquest
of Peru; he has died, and unexpectedly bequeathed me
a fortune, that sets the portionless Pandora upon a level with
the wealthy heiresses of the great palatine himself. For a
long time want of fortune was the only obstacle that stood
between me and all my hopes of happiness. Now that
poverty is no longer an evil to me, and wealth no longer
desirable, I have obtained this unwelcome acquisition.
You can have no conception how painful a sensation is
produced by this mockery, the gift of ample possessions to
the votary of despair.”
I endeavoured somewhat to encourage Pandora; but she
obstinately rejected my soothings. I was the less importunate
on this subject, as, since the return of my son, I
persisted to persuade myself that I should soon have something
more substantial to offer her on his part, than mere
guesses and conjectures. The day after this conversation,
I boldly sought the presence of the chevalier. Till then,
I had, since our return to Presburg, avoided to meet him.
I now resolved to force from him a hearing; to assure
him, with the most solemn asseverations, of my own innocence,
and the constancy of his mistress; to represent to
him in how eminent a degree the newly acquired estate of
Pandora was calculated to facilitate their mutual wishes;
and finally, to offer him any pledge he should desire of the
sincerity of my declarations, even to the banishing myself
from the presence and intercourse of him and the lovely
Pandora for ever.
When I saw my son, his appearance and air advanced
a forcible claim on my compassion. I will not now describe
them. Suffice it, that they completely proved, how
true was the sympathy, even to the minutest particulars,
between him and his mistress. The difference was only in[471]
kind, and not in degree: hers a defenceless, a delicate and
truly feminine grief; while his, amidst all its aggravations,
had something in it of the champion and the hero. When
he felt most severely, he seemed to disdain himself for
what he felt; and, though his struggles were excruciating,
he resolutely smoothed his manly front, and the loftiness
of his spirit produced on his cheek a generous and a settled
blush.
I have just said that I had resolved to force from him a
hearing. I was mistaken in my calculations on this point.
Dejected as his habits had lately been, he no sooner saw
me, than he advanced towards me with a fierce and imperative
demeanour, that absolutely startled me.
“How is it, man!” cried he, “that you are at this
hour out of custody?”
“Custody!” interdicted and astonished, repeated I.
“Yes, custody! If such a wretch as thou art, be permitted
to go at large, what human institution, what human
possessions, shall ever be secure?”
“Good God,” said I, “what am I to understand by
your present rage? I know that you have considered me
as your personal enemy and the underminer of your happiness.
But, when first you accused me of this crime, you
treated me in a manner less violent and disdainful than
that which you now employ.”
“I brook not to explain. Read that letter. I received
it at Fribourg. That letter brought me back from the confines
of France to the spot where now we meet.”
I took up the letter. Its contents were nearly as follow:—

LETTER.
“My dear Friend,—You will permit me to call you
so, since to me, and me only, you have recently thought
proper to confide your projects, and your unfortunate passion
for the charming Pandora. What you related to me
on the subject convinced me how much she was unworthy
of your love, and how basely she has conducted herself
towards you. Yet you will yourself feel some compassion
for her, when you learn who it is upon whom she has[472]
bestowed this unmerited preference. Know then that this
wretched D’Aubigny is no other than the notorious Chatillon,
the infamous impostor, who, by his machinations
about a year ago preserved the Turkish provinces of Hungary
from being conquered by the christian arms. The
man is moreover a magician, the pretended or real possessor
of the philosopher’s stone. He is therefore doubly
worthy of death, first as a traitor, the abettor and comforter
of the common enemy of the christian faith, and,
secondly, as a dealer in the black art, and a man notoriously
sold and delivered over to the devil.
“I have received this information from the most unquestionable
authority. A soldier in my old corps, who has
lately escaped from a Turkish prison, no sooner saw him
than he identified his person. I happened to be near the
fellow at the moment, when, by an unexpected exclamation,
he betrayed his discovery. It immediately struck me that
the circumstance might be of importance to your interests;
and, therefore, taking the soldier aside, I charged him not
to mention to any one what he had observed. To render
his secrecy the more secure, I have since removed him to
a garrison at some distance from Presburg; and I have
myself mentioned the circumstance to no living creature,
that I might first receive your instructions on the subject,
and act in all respects concerning it as you shall judge
proper. The blackness of the character of the man sets all
exaggeration at defiance. This very individual, whom you
liberated from the bowels of the earth, who by the most
treacherous arts won your confidence, and upon whom you
lavishly heaped every imaginable distinction, was all the
while conscious to himself, that he was the character that
of all that live you hated most; in one word, the renegado
Chatillon. He acted consistently with his preceding conduct
and his recent disingenuousness, when he seduced
from you the affections of the woman of your choice.
“I am concerned to add, that, on the very day that I
made this discovery, this Chatillon D’Aubigny disappeared
from Presburg, nor can I by any effort learn whither he is
gone. It is impossible he should have been informed by any
human means of the detection that had happened. But indeed[473]
it is vain to attempt to form any reasonable conjecture, respecting
a character so mysterious and inexplicable.
“Your devoted friend,
“Andrew, count of Bathori.”

“Well, sir,” seeing I had finished the perusal, “and
what have you now to allege? When I saw you simply as
the favoured lover of Pandora, however treacherous and dishonourable
I might deem your conduct towards me, I quitted
the field. I did not trust myself to be a judge in my own
cause. I did not confide in my estimate of your unworthiness,
when I was myself wholly concerned. I had
some time before received an invitation from the duke
d’Aumale, who was collecting a number of generous and
high-spirited nobles to accompany Mary queen of Scots
to the barbarous fields of her native realm. I at first declined,
I now accepted, the invitation; I set out for Paris
to join him. I found that letter waiting my arrival at Fribourg,
and I returned. Deeply as Pandora has sunk in
my esteem, I determined I would never allow her to be
thrown away upon the infamous Chatillon.
“You haunt my steps. I heard of you again and again
on my route as I returned from Fribourg. I arrive at
Presburg, and presently after you again make your appearance.
What further villanies have you to act? What new
treacheries have you devised against me? This morning I
consented to the representations of count Bathori, and agreed
that you should be delivered up to justice. Why then are
you not in custody?
“When I consider the mystery and inscrutableness of
your character, I am lost in conjecture. You are said to be
a magician, a dealer in the unhallowed secrets of alchymy
and the elixir vitæ. In cases like this, all the ordinary
rules of human sagacity and prudence are superseded, the
wisest man is a fool, and the noblest spirit feels the very
ground he stood on struck from under his feet. How can
I know that the seduction of Pandora’s affections is not
owing to magical incantations, who in that case is rather
an object for compassion than for censure? How can I tell
that the fraternal resemblance borne by your features to[474]
my own, and the sudden and ardent partiality that rose in
my breast when first I saw you, have not been produced by
the most detested arts? Magic dissolves the whole principle
and arrangement of human action, subverts all generous
enthusiasm and dignity, and renders life itself loathsome
and intolerable.
“This is to me the most painful of all subjects. I had a
father whom I affectionately loved: he became the dupe of
these infernal secrets. I had a mother, the paragon of the
creation: that father murdered her. All the anguish I
ever felt, has derived its source from alchymy and magic.
While the infamous Chatillon thus stands before me, I feel
all the long-forgotten wounds of my heart new opened, and
the blood bursting afresh from every vein. I have rested,
and been at peace; and now the red and venomed plague,
that tarnished the years of my opening youth, returns to
blast me. Begone, infamous, thrice-damned villain! and
let me never see thee more!
“Wretch that you are!” continued Charles; for he saw
me motioning to withdraw,—I felt that all further expostulation
and discussion on my part was useless,—“wretch
that you are! what is it that you are about to do? Think
no to escape my vengeance! In the midst of all the tumultuous
passions you waken in my breast, I still feel in
myself the soldier and the man of honour. I am not a thief-taker
or a bailiff. You are within my power, and that is
your present protection. I will not now deliver you up to
the justice of the state, but will hurl against you my personal
defiance. I am willing to meet you man to man: I
thirst to encounter you as my worst and most mortal foe,
who has perpetrated against me the basest injuries, and excited
in my bosom the most hateful sensations. Though
you were fenced with all the legions of hell, I fear you not;
and seeing that, after all that is past, you have once again
intruded into my presence, I here bind myself by all that is
sacred to pursue you to the death.”
What could I answer to such an attack? I saw at once
that the case, as to all future harmony between me and my
son was desperate and irremediable. What hope could I
entertain further? What had hitherto been the result of[475]
our ill-fated intercourse? Every offence and prejudice that
can gall the human mind had been brought forward in it in
turn. I had wounded Damville in the most sensible point
of private life, and had blasted his hopes there where he
stored them all. I had offended his most rooted political
prepossessions, by aiding the Turk, and feeding a nation
that perished with hunger. I was an equivocal character,
assuming different names, and wandering over the world
with different pretences. Last of all, I had revived in his
mind the images of his father and his mother,—all that had
once been most dear, and now was most painful, to his recollection;
and had tortured his fancy with nameless horrors.
These sentiments could never be removed. All the explanations
in the world could never reconcile me to his mind;
and I felt that I had that within, which, in what was to
come, as it had in what was past, must for ever annihilate
all confidence between us. At once therefore I accepted his
challenge, arranged with him the terms of a hostile encounter
on the following morning, and immediately after bid
adieu to Presburg, and to the sight of every soul contained
within its walls, for ever.
This is, I powerfully feel, the last adventure that I shall
ever have the courage to commit to writing. A few minutes
more, and I will lay down my pen, and resolve in the most
solemn and sacred manner never to compose another line.
Indeed, all other adventures must necessarily be frigid and
uninteresting, compared with that which I have now described.
Great God, what a fate was mine! Anxious as
I had been to prove myself in the most momentous respects
the benefactor of my son, dismissing all other thoughts and
cares from my mind, journeying with this sole object in
view, from Presburg to Venice, and from Venice to
Presburg, from Hungary to the banks of the Rhine, and
from the banks of the Rhine back again to Hungary,—the
whole scene was now terminated by a declaration on his
part, that nothing could appease the animosity he cherished
against me, short of rioting in the blood of his father’s
heart. I was reduced to the necessity either of lifting my
sword against my son, of running myself upon the point of
his weapon, or of forfeiting the engagement between us,[476]
and suffering him to brand me as a coward in the face of
Christendom. I mention not this, because the variety of
objects of choice produced in me the slightest hesitation.
Weary as I was of life, I could cheerfully have consented
to die, but not to stain the sword of Charles de Damville
with my vital blood. I prevented him from being the assassin
of his father’s life; I could not prevent him from
being the assassin of his father’s character. He was assiduous
and indefatigable in spreading against me the blackest
invectives, which he regarded as the most unerring truths.
All Hungary has resounded for thirty years with the atrocities
of the sieur de Chatillon; what is here recorded contains
the whole and unvarnished truth on the subject.
This narrative however shall never see the light, till the
melancholy hour when Charles de Damville shall be no
more.
Yet in the midst of the anguish, the disappointment of
every cherished hope, which rends my soul, I have one
consolation, and that an invaluable one, in the virtues, the
glory, and the happiness of my son. I said I would forget
every gratification and sentiment of my own in him; I am
now more than ever instigated to do so. When I quitted
Presburg, I left Cabriera behind me in that city, and I
took care to obtain a parting interview with him. He
afterwards gave me the meeting, as we then concerted, at
Trieste in the duchy of Carniola. It happened, as I had
flattered myself the event would prove, that, the visible
source of umbrage being removed, Charles and Pandora in
no long time came to a mutual understanding, and were
finally made happy in each other. I had been the fortunate
means of supplying to this excellent and incomparable
creature the only defect under which she laboured, a want
of fortune; her uncle, having no longer a pretence to
oppose their mutual passion, united their hands; and, at
the time of which I am speaking, they were regarded as
the most graceful and accomplished couple in the whole
Hungarian dominions. The chevalier de Damville is considered
in that country as the great bulwark of the Christian
frontier, and the most generous and illustrious pupil in
the school of the Bayards and the Scanderbegs. Cabriera,[477]
worn out with years and fatigues, but still grasping and
avaricious to his latest hour, expired in my arms in the
city of Trieste; and by his death yielded me this contentment,
that henceforth the only obvious means for detecting
my beneficent fraud in securing the dower of Pandora was
for ever removed.
That the reader may enter the more fully into my sentiment
of congratulation upon the happiness of my son,
and rise from the perusal of my narrative with a more
soothing and pleasurable sensation, I will here shortly recapitulate
the good qualities that had been unfolded in this
truly extraordinary young man from his earliest infancy.
He was a child, only nine years of age, at the period of the
truly affecting and exemplary behaviour the reader may remember
him to have displayed, while I was at Paris squandering
the property of my family at the gaming-table. In
the alienation of mind produced in me by that dreadful
catastrophe, he was my constant attendant, my careful
nurse, and my affectionate friend. When, twelve months
after, we were driven by our calamities out of Switzerland,
and I lay extended to all human appearance on the bed of
death, Charles was the comforter of his mother, the friend
of his sisters, and even, young as he was, contributed to the
maintenance of my starving family by the labour of his infant
hands. At Dresden, as yet no more than seventeen
years of age, he was assailed by one of the severest trials
with which the mind of man can in any case be beset. But
he hesitated not a moment. Obliged to choose between
poverty and innocence, with the sacrifice of all his habitudes,
and the loss of every friend, on the one side, and
wealth, new to his enjoyment, with ignominy or an equivocal
character, on the other, his determination was instant
and unalterable. Cast, at so immature an age, alone and
portionless, upon the world, he almost immediately, by his
gallantry, his winning qualities, and his virtues, gained to
himself a friend in one of the greatest captains of the age.
Unaided by the brilliancy of family or fortune, he acquired
the character of the bravest soldier in Hungary, where all
were brave. This last trial, to which I had been the undesigning
means of subjecting him, was none of the least[478]
arduous. Love often entails imbecility on the noblest of
mankind: but Charles surmounted the most perilous attacks
of this all-conquering passion. When he thought
Pandora unworthy, he tore himself from her, and would
not admit a struggle. When he believed she loved another,
he disdained to claim a heart that seemed alienated from
him, and himself joined the hands of his mistress and his
rival. He might have died; he could not disgrace himself.
I was the hero’s father!—but no! I am not blinded by
paternal partiality;—but no! he was indeed what I thought
him, as near the climax of dignity and virtue as the frailty
of our nature will admit. His virtue was at length crowned
with the most enviable reward the earth has to boast,—the
faithful attachment of a noble-minded and accomplished
woman. I am happy to close my eventful and somewhat
melancholy story with so pleasing a termination. Whatever
may have been the result of my personal experience of
human life, I can never recollect the fate of Charles and
Pandora without confessing with exultation, that this busy
and anxious world of ours yet contains something in its
stores that is worth living for.
THE END.


FOOTNOTES

[1] To this story, in the book from which I have quoted it, is subjoined the following
reference:—“Mémoires Historiques, 1687, tom. i. p. 365.” Being desirous
of giving my extract from the oldest authority, I caused the British
Museum, and the libraries of Oxford and Cambridge, to be searched for this
publication, but in vain. The story and the reference are, not improbably,
both of them the fictions of the English writer.


[2] Johnson’s Occasional Prologue on Garrick’s assuming the management of
Drury-lane Theatre.


[3] Charles V.


[4] Henry VIII.


[5] Antonio de Leyva.


[6] The constable of Bourbon.


[7] Mistresses of Francis I.


[8] The battle of Cerisolles.


[9] This incident is told, nearly in the words of St. Leon, by Thuanus, Historiæ
Sui Temporis, lib. 2. cap. 14.



London:
Printed by A. & R. Spottiswoode,
New-Street-Square.
</div></body></text></TEI>
