<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">
CHAPTER XXII.
Meanwhile it was necessary that I should make the best
of the present circumstances. My heart was wounded; my
spirit was in a manner broken; but not so utterly withered
and destroyed as to make me rest supine in perpetual imprisonment.
I felt with equal conviction and pungency
that my character and my happiness had sustained the
deepest injuries; but I felt it incumbent on me to collect
and improve the fragments that remained. For some days
indeed after the conference with Monluc, I was sunk in the
deepest dejection. But, as that dejection subsided, I began
to turn a steady attention upon the future. I recollected
that an eternal and inexhaustible gift deserved to be made
the subject of more than one experiment, before a decision
was formed upon its merits. I shall become wiser, said I,
as I go forward. Experience, however bitter, will teach
me sagacity and discrimination. My next experiment shall
be made with more prudence and a soberer gradation. I
will remove to some distant country, where the disadvantages
of my past adventures shall not follow me. I will
take a new name. I shall then enjoy the benefit of a tyro
just entering a scene, to all the personages of which he is
wholly unknown. I shall be like a serpent that has stripped
its tarnished and wrinkled skin, and comes forth in all the
gloss and sleekness of youth. Surely, in an unknown land,
with the prejudice of wealth in my favour, and no prejudices
against me, I shall know how to conduct myself so as
to obtain honour and respect. It is impossible that inexhaustible
wealth and immortal youth, gifts so earnestly
coveted by every creature that lives, gifts which if I were
known to possess, my whole species from the mere impulses
of envy would probably combine to murder me, as not able
to endure the sight of one so elevated above his brethren,—it
is impossible that such gifts should not be pregnant with
variety of joy.
Marguerite greatly contributed to raise me from the
dejection, into which my imprisonment and the conference[233]
of Monluc had sunk me. She was my better genius. I
had been so accustomed to receive consolation from her lips
in the most trying circumstances, that now the very sound
of her voice was able to smooth my wrinkled brow, and
calm my agitated spirit. I listened as to the sound of an
angelic lyre; I was all ear; I drank in the accents of her
tongue; and, in the dear delight, my cares were hushed,
and my sorrows at an end. She talked to me of her daughters,
whom she represented as about to have no protector
but their father; she urged me to watch over them, and to
take such steps as should most conduce to their future virtue
and happiness; she pointed out the practicability of
escape, and recommended to me to fly to some distant
country: the dreams of future prosperity from the gifts of
the stranger were not hers; they were all my own. It was
inexpressibly affecting at this time to receive consolation
from her, who had no consolation in her own breast, who
had bid farewell to all the gay attractions of the world, and
talked familiarly of her death as a thing certain to happen
in no very long time. She had lost the purest gratifications
of the domestic scene; she had lost her son; her heart
was broken; yet with her dying accents she sought to dispel
retrospect, and inspire cheerfulness, in the breast of her
husband.
The reader may perhaps imagine that I was something
too sanguine, when, surrounded with jailors and all the
precautions of a prison, I planned the nature and scene of
my next residence exactly as if I had been a person at
large. But I took it for granted that the power of money
I possessed would easily unlock to me the gates of my captivity.
I believed that, upon the lowest calculation, personal
liberty was clearly included among the gifts of the
stranger. Impressed with this opinion, I fixed upon a
negro, a servant of the prison, and who had the keys of my
apartment, as the subject of my pecuniary experiment. The
idea of applying to him had perhaps first occurred to me,
from the mere circumstance of my seeing him more frequently
than any other attendant of the prison. When I
thought further of the matter, I judged, from the meanness
of his rank and his apparent poverty, that I could not have[234]
chosen better. So far as related to the sum to be paid as
the price of my liberty, it was indeed indifferent to me,
whether it were large or small. I had however suffered so
much from the inconsiderate lavishing of wealth, that I had
no inclination on the present occasion to make ostentation
of more than was necessary. But, what was of most importance
to me, I was desirous that my first experiment
should be a successful one. Though not unaware of the
power of gold, I conceived that, among persons of middling
rank and easier circumstances, there might be varieties
of disposition, and I might be mistaken in my choice.
Some might have the whim of integrity, or might place a
sturdy sort of pride in showing that they were content with
what they had, and were too high for a bribe. There
might be persons who, though of plebeian rank, might value
reputation as much as ever I had done, and be of opinion
that no advance of station could compensate for the name
or the consciousness of dishonour. These distinctions may
seem an idle and superfluous refinement, when it is considered
that I had the power of raising my bribe to the level
of any man’s honesty or pride, be it as great as it might;
and it may be thought that my offer might be so increased
as to be too dazzling for mortal firmness to resist. Be that
as it will, I am merely stating the reflections that passed
through my mind, not entering into their vindication.
Taking the first opportunity then of accosting this man
when he was alone with me, I addressed him thus:—
“My good friend, are not you poor?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Would not you readily do me a kindness?”
“If my master give me leave, I will.”
“You mistake me. Would you be my friend?”
“I do not know what you mean, sir. I have been used
to call the man I love my friend. If you mean that, you
know I cannot choose whether I will be a man’s friend; it
comes of itself.”
“Can I not make you my friend?”
“That is, make me love you?”
I was surprised at the propriety of his answers. I am
unable at this distance of time to recall the defects of his[235]
language: and I disdain the mimic toil of inventing a
jargon for him suitable to the lowness of his condition: the
sense of what he said I faithfully report. I had before been
struck with a certain correctness of thinking in him;
but I now examined his countenance more attentively than
I had ever before done, and thought I could distinctly
trace in it the indications of a sound understanding and an
excellent heart.
“I do not know, sir,” continued he. “If I see that
you are a good man, I believe I shall love you. But if it
happened that you were good and generous to me, I am sure
I should love you very much.”
“You are very poor?”
“So they tell me. I never had more than a shilling or
two at a time in my life.”
“It is a very sad thing to be poor?”
“Why, yes, so I have heard, sir. But, for my own
part, I am always merry and gay.”
“My good fellow, I will make you rich.”
“Thank you, sir! But what good will that do me?”
“You are a servant: I will make you a master of
servants.”
“Now, that I should not like at all. I am merry, because
I am light-hearted. If I had money, and property
to take care of, and servants to direct, I am afraid they
would make me grave and suspicious, and in every respect
unlike what you see me.”
“Is it possible you should be pleased with your present
situation, under the orders of one man in a house, and
obliged to play the tyrant to the rest?”
“Why, as you say, sir, there may be more agreeable
situations than the life of a jail. But, as to being under
orders, I have no objection to that. I never knew any other
condition, and therefore I am contented. It is not pleasant
indeed to have a master who is always scolding and dissatisfied;
but the gentleman I serve at present is reasonable;
I know how to content him, and, when I have done
that, he leaves me to please myself. You offer me money:
now, sir, that is not what I call being generous; I count
nothing for much, except when a man shows me has bowels,[236]
and convinces me that he thinks justice due even to a
negro. I dare say however you designed it for generosity,
and expected something from me in return. Tell me what
it is you want, and whatever I can do with propriety, you
may depend on it I will.”
“Do you approve of a man’s being deprived of his
liberty?”
“Will you please to tell me what you mean by liberty?
You offered me just now what you called liberty and independence;
and I am content to be a servant.”
“Would you be pleased, instead of being a turnkey, to
have the key turned on yourself?”
“That I should not. I understand the disagreeableness
of that well enough, for when I first entered this place, it
was as a prisoner.”
“If then, my good fellow, you were convinced that I
was a man disposed to be generous to you in your own
way, and to deserve your attachment and love, surely you
would not refuse to deliver me from a situation which you
have yourself felt to be so disagreeable and calamitous.”
“I understand you now, sir. I have already a master
with whom I am satisfied, and I do not wish to change my
service. When I was a prisoner, he found out that I was
innocent; he got me cleared, and gave me employment. I
am put here for the express purpose of seeing the prisoners
in safe custody. That is the contract between me and my
master. When I took the keys, by that action I pledged
myself to be faithful to my trust; and the nobleness of my
master’s behaviour to me in removing me from being a prisoner
to be a free servant, is a double bond upon my fidelity.
I would sooner consent to be torn limb from limb, than fail
in what is expected from me. You may be generous to a
harmless stranger; you have most reason to be generous to
a man you love; but, if you would heap benefits upon me
merely because I proved myself a villain, I can only say it
would be disgraceful to be the object of your favour.”
Thus saying, he quitted me, and withdrew from further
parley. The conversation in which we had engaged, though
I had had considerable experience in the world, was altogether
new to me, and overwhelmed me with astonishment.[237]
I found in this trial, that the power of money was subject
to limitations, of which previously I had not been in the
slightest degree aware. I thought that nothing but the
most extraordinary degree of resolution and self-denial could
enable a man to resist its enticements; and I had even been
told, though I did not believe, that every man had his
price, and a bribe capable of indefinite augmentation must
be in all cases victorious. Yet here was a poor creature
utterly exempt from its operation. He had no sense of
those attractions, which so often degrade the best, and convert
virtue into the most shameless profligacy. It cost him
no effort to be honest, and he uttered sentiments that would
have given lustre to the most heroic character, without any
consciousness of their greatness. What I had seen, led
me also to reflect on another singularity I discerned in him.
In the midst of the admirable, I had almost said the sublime,
integrity he discovered, (for is it not a criterion of
the sublime to be great without an effort?) he was destitute
of knowledge, of intellectual cultivation, and all those exquisite
sensations that most distinguish the man from the
brute. He passed on quietly in the road of ordinary life,
and thought not of the ambition to be wise or great, to be
honoured by thousands, or a benefactor to ages yet unborn.
Kings might have confessed their inferiority to this man.
But is he to be regarded as the model of what a human
creature should be wished to be? Oh, no!
But the most memorable feeling impressed upon me by
this conversation, was a conviction of what I had been
backward to confess, that knaves were the persons to whose
assistance and concert I must look, and that I must be upon
my guard against an honest man. No one was qualified
to be my coadjutor, till he had proved himself unworthy of
all just and honourable society. The friend I must seek,
was a man whose very soul melted at a bribe, whom money
would seduce to perpetrate whatever his judgment most
abhorred. Honour and integrity in the most refined and
the rudest state, Monluc and the negro, both refused. It
is impossible to conceive a sensation more painful and humiliating,
than was this conviction to my mind.
I was not long at leisure for these reflections. In a few[238]
minutes the master of the prison entered my apartment,
and with him the negro whom I had endeavoured to prevail
on to assist in restoring me to liberty. The master
began to reproach me in very harsh terms for attempting to
seduce his servant from his duty, and asked me what sort
of enjoyment or satisfaction a man could have in life, if he
could not depend upon the people he put into his employment?
To this I answered with sternness, “that I should
hold no debate about right and wrong with a jailor; that
he might depend upon it I would leave no stone unturned
to set myself free, and, what was more, that I would be
free; and that, for his part, it was his business to keep me
if he could, but not to insult me.” I therefore insisted
upon his quitting the room.
“What use,” replied the fellow, “do you think now
there is in putting yourself in a passion? If I have not a
right to speak to you, I know what I have a right to do,
put you in the strong room, and load you with irons.”
I turned my back upon him. “And how came you,”
said I to the negro, “to go and betray me? I should have
expected better things of you. If you refused to serve me,
at least you needed not have endeavoured to hurt me.”
“I did nothing but my duty, sir. I have no wish to
hurt you: but it is my business, not merely to take care of
my master’s interests myself, but to see that they are not
injured by any body else. If he was not put on his guard,
you might have been more successful with the next turnkey
you endeavoured to bribe.”
“You will find it more to your interest, monsieur,” interposed
the jailor, “to talk to me than to my servant.
You are determined to be free, you say. If that is the case,
and it is to happen, who has so good a right to benefit by
your resolution as I have?”
My eyes were opened in a moment. I saw that the
knave whose rigour and sternness could not hold out against
the warmth of a bribe, the friend of whose assistance I was
in want, stood before me.
“I do not wonder,” proceeded he, “that you preferred
applying to one of my servants. Their honesty must be
expected to be had at a cheaper market. But, for my part,[239]
I am determined that no man shall ever pass these walls,
without my being the richer. If then your escape is a
thing that must happen, let us see what you can afford to
give me for it.”
“Dear master,” interposed the negro, “you surely will
not listen to the gentleman’s offer. When I refused to
betray my trust, it is impossible you should consent to betray
yours!”
“Hold your tongue, blockhead!” said the other. “Do
not you see that monsieur is determined to escape? I know
he is rich. Though you have refused a bribe, I am sure
that all your fellows will not. The thing will happen sooner
or later in spite of every thing I can do; and there can
be no harm in my helping to bring about, what it is impossible
I should prevent.”
A morality like this seems exactly in its place in the
breast of a jailor. We had already made some progress in
adjusting the terms of our contract, when the keeper of the
prison interposed:—
“But, monsieur, you will please to remark, that this is
an affair which will be attended with difficulty. Whatever
passes between you and me must be a secret. Your escape
will be a thing open and notorious, and you must have a
confederate, that I may not bear the blame of it. You
must therefore take my black here along with you, that his
flight may cause all the blame to fall upon him.”
“O, pray, master,” said the negro, “do not part with
me! I love you, and will do any thing in the world, if you
will let me stay. You saved my life for aught I know,
and made a man of me again; you cannot think what good
it does me to serve a master that has been so kind to me!”
“Get you gone!” replied his owner. “You are of no
use to me; you are not fit for a jail; you are so simple,
I cannot tell what to do with you!”
“Indeed I do not like to go with this gentleman; it will
break my heart. He said he would be generous and kind to me,
if I turned a villain; I shall never be able, and shall never
desire to earn his kindness: but you rewarded me because I
was innocent. He said he would make a master of me; and
I am better as I am; I had much rather be a servant.”
[240]
The difficulties of this poor fellow were soon silenced by
the peremptoriness of his master. The jailor told him that
he would do him a great service, by thus giving his master
an opportunity of representing him as the traitor; and,
with this consideration, the negro dried his tears, and with
a reluctant heart consented to accompany me. Thus were
his exemplary fidelity and affection rewarded! So little do
some men seem capable of feeling the value of attachment!
The character of the master was a singular one. The
meanness and mercenariness of his spirit were unredeemed
by a single virtue. He was avarice personified. But he
had found or imagined an interest in taking this negro, who
had been want only thrown into prison by a former tyrant,
for his servant; and this the poor fellow, in the simplicity
of his heart, had mistaken for an act of exalted generosity.
His avarice had swallowed up all his other passions; and
his servants had neither impatience nor insolence to encounter
from him: weighed therefore in the balance of
the negro’s experience, he appeared a miracle of mildness
and benevolence.
Our bargain was at length concluded; and, the next
time Marguerite came to visit me, I announced to her the
success of my negotiation. Before we parted, we sent for
the jailor, and discussed with him the road I should take.
My purpose was to pass into Italy; and Marguerite undertook
by midnight to have every thing prepared to convey
us to the foot of the mountains. This point being adjusted,
the keeper of the prison left us; and, tenderly embracing
Marguerite, I besought her to congratulate me upon the
recovery of my liberty. She had heard however of the
infamous nature of the charge against me, and, though she
yielded it no credit, I could easily perceive that it rendered
yet heavier the depression under which she laboured.
She returned my embrace; the tears stole down
her cheeks; but she was silent. I endeavoured to divert
her thoughts and re-animate her spirits, by hinting
at the new scenes before us, and the distant country to
which we were about to remove; but in vain. “I will
not reproach you, Reginald!” said she; “I will not desert
my duty while I have power to perform it; you may depend[241]
upon my doing every thing I am able both for the
children and yourself!”
She left me in a very melancholy frame of mind. I had
not expected to see her thus languid and disconsolate; and
upon the eve of my liberation, I felt it like caprice. Incomparable
woman! She was incapable of giving intentional
pain: but, with her exquisitely susceptible mind, she
was unable to support the dreadful reverse in which I had
involved her, or even at times to assume the gestures of
cheerfulness and tranquillity; gestures that, at the best,
but ill disguised the grief within!
I was busily reflecting on what had just occurred, when
the keeper of the prison re-entered my apartment. “I am
come, monsieur,” said he, “to take my leave of you. As
I do not at all intend to lose my place, it is not proper that
I should see you any more. You understand me?”
Two days had already elapsed since the conclusion of our
contract, and I had provided myself for this and such other
demands as seemed likely to be immediately impending. I
should have preferred indeed to have delayed this payment
till the moment of my departure: but what the jailor suggested
appeared reasonable; and I could not assign, even
to my own mind, any cause why I should be reluctant to
comply with it. I paid to this wretch the price of his villany.
I now began to count the hours, and eagerly to anticipate
the arrival of midnight. Though the moment of my
liberty was so near, I yet contemplated with unspeakable
loathing the scene of my confinement, which was associated
with the deepest disgrace and the blackest charges that are
incident to a human creature. I felt as if, in proportion
as I removed from the hated spot, I should at least shake
off a part of the burthen that oppressed me, and grow comparatively
young again.
Time was far from moving indeed with the rapidity my
impatience required; but the hour of appointment at last
was near, and I expected every moment the faithful negro
to appear, and announce to me my freedom. The cathedral
bell now sounded twelve; I heard the noise of steps
along the gallery; and presently a key was applied to the[242]
door of my apartment. It opened; and three persons,
whom I knew for servants of the prison, entered.
“Come, sir,” said one of them; “you must follow
me.”
“Where is my friend the negro?” said I.
“Ask no questions; speak never a word; but come.”
It was strange that the master of the prison, whose temper
was so full of anxiety and caution, should unnecessarily
trust three of his people, who might easily have been kept
ignorant of this hazardous secret! This circumstance however
did not strike me at first so strongly as it ought to
have done. I had perfect confidence in his fidelity to his
profligate bargain, and expected every moment to meet the
negro who was to be my guide. My conductors led me by
a way which I soon perceived did not lead to the ordinary
entrance of the prison.
“Where are we going?” said I.
“Hold your tongue, or you will spoil all;” replied one
of them roughly.
I bethought me that there might be an objection to the
dismissing me by the public gate; I recollected to have
heard that there were several subterranean outlets to the
citadel; I judged from the words I had just heard that
my conductors were acquainted with the plan that had
been formed; and for all these reasons I proceeded with
tolerable ease and security. I was not much longer however
permitted to doubt. I was conducted to one of the
dungeons of the prison, and told that there I was to remain.
At first I remonstrated loudly, and told them “that I had
been promised my liberty, and not a treatment like this.”
“We know that, sir,” replied they, “and that is the
reason you are brought here. It is our business to teach
you that the greatest offence that can be committed by a
man in prison is to attempt to escape.”
The shock and surprise that so unexpected an issue to
my adventure produced, rendered me outrageous. I was
no longer able to control my fury; and, without knowing
what I proposed, I knocked down two of my attendants
before they had an opportunity to secure me, and rushed
up the flight of steps by which we had descended. The[243]
third however contrived to intercept me; and, while we
struggled, the other two came to his assistance. They
loaded me with fetters and chained me to the wall. I was
then left in utter darkness.
I felt myself sore with the bruises I had received in the
contest; but what was infinitely worse, I found the expectations
of freedom I had so confidently entertained,
baffled and disappointed. Marguerite and my children were
at this moment waiting for me to join them. They would
probably wait hour after hour in vain. To what cause
would they attribute my failing of my appointment? To
what cause was I myself to attribute my miscarriage? My
hopes in this instance had been in the utmost degree sanguine;
what was I to count upon for the future? Was
money useless in every instance in which mankind agreed
to think its power unquestionable? What was the source
of the present catastrophe and the harsh treatment I endured?
Was the keeper of the prison discovered, and dismissed
from his office? Had the negro gone and given
information against him? I formed a thousand conjectures
as to what might have happened; but I was unable
to rest in any.
I had remained about twelve hours in this situation, full
of angry and disconsolate thoughts, when the principal
jailor entered my dungeon. I looked at him with astonishment;
the cloud vanished from my understanding, and I
began to comprehend the solution of the enigma.
“Are you at large?” cried I, with indignation: “why
then am I here?”
“You are here by my orders.”
“Execrable villain!” said I. “Did you not promise
me my freedom? Have you not received the price of it?
How dare you show yourself in my presence?” As I spoke,
I shook my chains, I clenched my fists, I trembled with
resentment and rage.
“If you are not perfectly quiet and reasonable,” said he,
“I shall leave you to your fate and return no more.”
Nothing is more singular in a state of great mental effervescence,
than the rapidity with which our ideas succeed
each other. At such times we seem to think more in[244]
minutes than at other times in hours. I felt how miserable
a slave a man is, the moment he falls completely into the
power of another. The wretch who stood before me was
more vacant of human affections than any one I ever saw.
Yet I was his creature, to be moulded as he pleased. A
thousand injuries he could inflict upon me, for which
neither the institutions of society nor the extraordinary
endowments I derived from the stranger could afford a
remedy. He might so torture my mind and baffle my
wishes, as to kill in me every spark of lofty adventure and
generous pride. My liberty might, for aught I knew, be for
years at his disposal. I felt however that my best course
was to regard him with contempt, and use him as I would
a spade or a file, to execute my purposes, without suffering
him to awaken my passions. I immediately grew more calm,
and he perceived the revolution of my sentiments.
“You seem to wonder,” continued he, “that I did not
keep my engagement with you? I pride myself upon being
superior to the prejudices, by which other men are frightened,
like children with a bugbear. I have therefore no
rule but my interest: and I did not see how my interest
bound me to keep my engagement with you.”
“And what became of the countess?”
“I neither know nor care. I suppose she stayed all night
under the walls; I knew she durst not disturb the prison.”
I felt I had still emotions to suppress. I curbed my
tongue, but they showed themselves in my eyes.
“How do you intend to dispose of me?”
“Keep you in close custody. I have got your thousand
pounds; the next thing for me to take care of is, that I do
not lose my place.”
“And for what purpose do you come to me now?”
“Why to tell you a secret, I have not quite determined
what conduct to pursue, and therefore I came here
that I might have a better opportunity of judging.”
“Are you not afraid that I should inform the government
how you have cheated me?”
“You inform! Have not I got you under lock and key?
I warrant you, I will take care what goes out of these walls
to the government.”
[245]
“The countess has a licence to visit me.”
“What care I for that? I can keep her at bay as long as
I will. She will not easily go to the government; and she
is not such a fool as not to know, that to lodge a complaint
against me, is not the way to procure the liberty of a man
condemned to perpetual imprisonment. I can at any time
trump up a story of your attempting to corrupt the turnkeys,
and be sure, when I do, I will not want for proofs. That
will cover any thing I can do to annoy you, and answer any
accusation you can make against me. Do you think that
the word of a jailor will not be taken, before that of the
murderer he has in custody?”
“I can bring your own servants as witnesses, three of
whom assaulted me last night.”
“Dunce, do you think I trusted them with my secret?
They have nothing to tell, and apprehend nothing but a plot
between you and my black, who has been put into the penitentiary
for his offence. He is my only confident; and I
trust him, because his stupidity answers to me for his faith.”
“Suppose I were to double the bribe for which you sold
me my liberty, what security should I have that you would
abide by your bargain?”
“Oh, if you were to do that, it would alter the case.”
“Might you not then detain the money, and defy me, as
you have done now?”
“Suppose that a thing which might happen: can you
help yourself? can you do better?”
I saw there was no remedy, and I was constrained to
allow the success of this twofold perfidy. It was with an
ill grace, and an attempt at sullenness and indifference, that
the jailor accepted my proposal. The second thousand
however had irresistible charms; and, in spite of himself,
the sensation that made his heart dance, relaxed his muscles,
and played about his mouth. He was puzzled what to
think of me. The facility with which I produced the sums
he demanded, with less apparent effort than they might have
come from a duke or a sovereign prince, startled and staggered
him. He had still his qualms, and evidently doubted
whether he should not raise his price a third time. I saw
no safety but in pertinacity and firmness, and had the[246]
good fortune ultimately to check his doubtful, half-formed
experiments.
I was led by the accidents which have just been related,
into further and deeper reflections on the power of money,
as well as on the nature of the situation in which I found
myself placed by the legacy of the stranger. My present
experiment had been made upon a subject apparently the
most favourable that could have been devised, upon a man
whose breast the love of gold occupied without a rival: yet
with this man I very hardly succeeded. I was not indeed
so blinded by the present dejection of my spirit and sickness
of my heart, as to imagine that I had not a secure game
with this base-minded wretch, if I consented to play it. I
had only to enlarge my bribe, to change it from the limited
sum of two thousand pounds to the more brilliant offer of
two thousand per annum, and no doubt I might have led
him with me to the extremity of the globe. However he
might have demurred, however he might have doubted,
however curiosity, whetted even to agony by the goadings
of avarice, might have prompted him to an incessant enquiry
within himself as to the solution of my character and my
powers, his grasping spirit would infallibly have chained his
tongue, and been surety for his fidelity. But I could not
yet prevail upon myself to endow such groveling and noxious
propensities with so rich a reward. I considered, in the
language of the stranger, that the talent I possessed was of
the most momentous nature, and bestowed by the governor
of the universe for the highest purposes; and I should have
held myself unjustifiable in enriching by its means, however
urgent the necessity might appear, the most worthless of
mankind.
The sentiments of my tyrant varied every hour; he was
fickle, anxious, and undetermined; harassed with the double
fear of losing the sum already obtained, and of not securing
the whole of what was capable of being acquired. He parted
with me at last with all the pangs of a lover, who witnesses
the ceremony of his mistress’s taking the monastic veil, and
being sundered from him for ever. I was his Fortunatus’s
purse, and this was the last day he was to enjoy the use of it;
I was to him as the buried treasure of some long-forgotten[247]
hoarder, and he feared he should quit his digging before he
had carried off every thing that the field concealed. At
length however he began to apprehend that he had urged
the refinement of an unprincipled avarice as far as it would
go; and therefore in a few days, the negro being already
discharged from his penance, he suffered us to escape together.
</div></body></text></TEI>
