<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="40">
CHAPTER XL.
A succession of gloomy thoughts revolved in my mind for
some time after I was left to myself. I was however overcome
with fatigue, and, after an interval of harassing
meditations, insensibly fell asleep. I was awakened after
some hours’ repose, by the presence of Bethlem Gabor
standing by the side of my couch. He invited me to rise,
and, when I had attired myself, started the plan of our
visiting together the various apartments of the castle, a
small part of which only had been seen by me when I was
last at this place. Among other things, he told me, there
was a subterranean of most wonderful extent, interspersed
with a variety of cells and lurking places, of which no man
had to his knowledge ever ascertained the number.
The same dreary complexion of thought followed me
to-day, which had been first produced in me upon my reception
into the troop of Bethlem Gabor the preceding
night. My sensations were of the most depressing and
discomfiting nature; I felt as if I were the slave of some
dark, mysterious tyrant, and dragged along supinely wherever
he motioned me to go. I tasked myself seriously; I reasoned
with myself. I felt that it was no idle and every-day
part that I was called to sustain; and I resolved that
I would not be ruined by my own inactivity and cowardice.
Yet, when I examined the question dispassionately, I could
not find that I had any occasion for courage, and I confessed
that it was not less censurable, to discover a useless
spirit of mistrust and defiance, than to desert one’s preservation
where resistance was demanded. What reason
had I to suspect a man between whom and myself there
had prevailed so much mutual confidence? None, none,
I replied, but the causeless and superstitious misgivings of
my own mind! Even if I had ground to distrust him,
what remedy had I against his ill faith, placed as I was in
the midst of his own domains, and surrounded by men devoted
to his service? To discover apprehension under such
circumstances, was to excite animosity.—These reasonings[409]
particularly occurred to my mind, as I stood waiting for
the torch, which he had himself gone to procure that he
might attend me to the subterranean caverns.—I had as
yet seen no one, since we broke up from our nightly repast,
but my host. “We will breakfast,” said he, “when we
return from viewing these curiosities.”
We crept along a succession of dark and gloomy vaults,
almost in silence. Bethlem Gabor, though he led me on,
and discharged the office of a guide, seemed to have small
inclination to assume that of an interpreter. This was
sufficiently in unison with his ordinary character, to have
little claim to excite surprise. Yet the reader will not on
reflection greatly wonder that my present situation was far
from agreeable. I was alone in passages which, to judge
from any discoverable token, you would scarcely imagine
had for ages been trod by a human creature. The voice
was lost amidst the damps of these immense caverns; nor
was it possible by any exertion to call the hand of man to
your aid. My guide was an individual whom calamity
had prompted to quarrel with the world; of strong feelings
indeed, of capacious thought; but rugged, ferocious, brutal,
and inaccessible to prayer. I had chosen him for my protector
and ally; I had never intended to put myself in his
power. There was a mystery in his carriage, a something
not to be explained, a shell that no human forces could
penetrate, that was mortal to confidence, and might quail
the stoutest.
I thought there would be no end to our pilgrimage. At
length we came to a strong door, cross-barred and secured
with a frame of iron. Bethlem Gabor unlocked it. We
had no sooner entered, that it impetuously closed behind
us. “What is that?” said I, startled at the loudness of
the report. “Come on,” cried my host; “it is only the
wind whistling through the caverns: the spring-bolt is
shot, but I have the key in my hand!” At the opposite
end of the apartment was another door with an ascent of
five steps leading to it. Bethlem Gabor unlocked that
also, and then faced about with the torch in his hand: I
was close behind him. “Stay where you are!” said he
with a furious accent, and thrust me violently from him.[410]
The violence was unexpected: I staggered from the top of
the steps to the bottom. This door closed with as loud a
report as the other; Bethlem Gabor disappeared; I was
left in darkness.
For an instant I doubted whether the situation in which
I thus found myself were the result of design or of accident.
The shutting of the door might be ascribed to the latter:
the action however, and the words of my host did not admit
of that interpretation. I stood motionless, astonished,
and almost incapable of reflection. What an incredible
reverse was thus the creature of a moment! Yesterday I
possessed unbounded treasures, and the hearts of the whole
Turco-Hungarian nation. Yesterday, as I rode forth on
this fatal excursion, I beheld the food of a mighty people,
mature for consumption, the growth of my exertions; and
it will not be thought surprising that my heart leaped within
me at the sight. Who would not have envied the unparalleled
eminence at which I had arrived? My triumphs
were attended with no melancholy exceptions to damp their
joy. They were the children of no intrigue; they were
manly, frank, ingenuous, and honourable. My laurels were
stained with no drop of blood, were tarnished with no tears
of the widow and the orphan. How much more noble to
rescue mankind from famine and death, than to violate the
honest pride of their nature with the exhibition of victories
and trophies!
Yet, truly considered, there was nothing abrupt in the
reverse under which I was now suffering. The whole was
a chain, every link of which was indissolubly connected from
one end to the other. My attempt to rescue a people from
the horrors of famine necessarily exposed me to unfavourable
accidents and misconstruction. It inevitably led to
my application to the government for its aid. It could not
fail to excite the alarms and jealousies of government as to
the tendency of my proceedings. By exhibiting me as the
possessor of immense wealth, with very limited means for
the protection of that wealth, it marked me a prey to a rapacious
viceroy or his more despotic master. When I became
sensible of the precarious situation in which I stood towards
the powers of the state, could I have fallen upon a more[411]
natural expedient, than the endeavour to cover myself with
the shield of friendship and gratitude in the person of one
of its nobles? But this expedient would almost infallibly
lead to the placing myself sooner or later in the power of
the man whose friendship I sought. I had done so, and
this was the termination of my views and my projects!
I now well understood the purpose of that inattention
and neglect with which Bethlem Gabor had treated me the
preceding evening, the uneasiness resulting from which I
had blamed in myself at the time, as the dictate of weakness
and unworthy suspicion. Yesterday I had been placed
under the safeguard of a nation; every man in Buda and
its environs was familiar with my person; every man would
have been ready almost to sacrifice his life to procure my
safety. Now I was far from the scene of my philanthropical
exertions; no one in the troop of Bethlem Gabor knew who
I was; he had appeared to treat me the preceding evening
with indifference and contempt; if they saw me no more,
no curiosity would by that circumstance be excited in their
minds. My clients on the other hand in the vicinity of the
metropolis, however great an interest they might take in
my fortune, had no clue that could lead them to the knowledge
of it. They must suppose me a prisoner with the
Austrians, or that I had been killed, in resisting to become
their prisoner. I was cut off from all assistance and discovery,
and left as much in the power of my treacherous
ally, as if I had been alone with him, oppressed with the
utmost disparity of personal force, in the remotest island of
the Pacific Ocean.
Such were the reflections that early suggested themselves
to my mind in the solitude and darkness in which I was thus
unexpectedly involved. Meanwhile one tedious hour succeeded
to another, and I remained unintruded on and unnoticed.
I could form no conjecture as to the object of
Bethlem Gabor in the atrocious perfidy he had committed.
Could he have any resentment against me, and did he
meditate revenge? He had received from me nothing but
benefits. Did he employ restraint on my person as the
means of extortion? I could not conceive that he could
have any clue leading him to the discovery of my grand[412]
secret; and, short of this, my bounties had been so exuberant,
as, I imagined, left him nothing to wish. In this wilderness
of conjecture I however fixed upon extortion as a
motive less incredible than revenge. I impatiently waited,
till the appearance of my tyrant should free me from some
part of my present uncertainty.
He did not appear. In the mean time I was in a condition
feeble and exhausted. The exercise of yesterday, the
hourly-baffled expectation of meeting him whom I had
called my friend, the alternation of being first taken prisoner
and afterwards rescued, had extremely fatigued me.
We had travelled during the whole night. Yet the unaccountable
dejection of mind under which I laboured on our
arrival at Bethlem Gabor’s castle had prevented me from
taking almost any share in the coarse repast that had then
been set before us. The entrance of my host in the morning
had rendered my slumbers short. As I followed him to my
dungeon, unconscious whither I went, my limbs ached, and
my heart ached still more. I was ill prepared for a fast
of thirty-six hours which the brutality of my jailor inflicted
upon me. After having long expected him in vain, I gave
myself up to despair. What a termination of life for him
who possessed the philosopher’s stone!
I cannot do justice to the sensations that now took possession
of my mind. It was not the deadly calm of despair,
for I still expected every moment when Bethlem Gabor
would appear. I believed than he would, and I believed
that he would not, leave me to perish. I listened with eager
attention to every sound, and my soul floated on the howling
winds. In vain! nothing came of it; there was no
alteration in the sound, or only those vicissitudes to which
the howling of the wind is unavoidably subject. I then
turned away in anguish; I cursed; I stamped with my
feet; I smote my forehead with my closed hand; I tore
my hair. Anon another sound arrested my attention; it
was a different howling; it seemed to be like a human
voice; my fancy created to me the tread of a human foot.
I listened with more intentness of soul than ever. It was
again in vain!
No, no; he will not come! he will never come. Why[413]
should I agitate myself to no purpose? Let me lie down
and die!—I reasoned with myself. Why should I wish
to live? I am nothing to any human being: I am alone in
the boundless universe; I have no tie to existence. St.
Leon has no wife; St. Leon has no child; he has neither
connection nor friend in the world. Even in this wretched
vision of the philosopher’s stone, have I not tried it enough?
have I any hopes from it? is it not time that I should
throw away that and existence together?—My meditations
were ineffectual. I suppose it is the case with all men thus
violently thrust out of life in the full possession of their
faculties—I know it was the case with me,—the more
peremptory was my summoner, the more obstinately I clung
to the worthless toy.
At length I laid myself down on the floor; and, if I occasionally
listened, I no longer ran to the walls and the
doors to catch the uncertain sounds. The gnawings I now
felt within were intolerable. They were at one period so
severe, that I can compare them to nothing, but the sensation
of having swallowed a glowing ember. Afterwards,
the weakness of nature would no longer feed this excruciating
pain, and it subsided into a starting and convulsive
throb; the pain was diversified with intervals of a death-like
and insupportable sickness.—But, no; I will not attempt
to describe the horrors of hunger sublimed by despair, where
the torture of the mind gives new pungency and uproar to
the corporeal anguish. The image, as it now presents itself
to my recollection, is too dreadful.
At last I sunk into a state of insensibility; and the agony
I had suffered seemed drawn to its final close. The busy
turmoil, the feverish dream of human existence was at an
end. I shut my eyes, and I believed I should open them
no more.
</div></body></text></TEI>
