<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">
CHAPTER XXX.
Such was the state of my mind, when it happened, one
gloomy evening in the latter end of March, that my valet
announced to me three gentlemen who were come to visit
me. It was strange: I had no visitors; I indulged no
relaxation but that of the street, and of public places. Do
you know who they are? said I. I accidentally looked
up, and saw paleness and terror written in his countenance.
He had not however time to reply, before they burst into
the room. They were alguazils of the inquisition. They
told me their errand was to conduct me to the holy office.
I submitted, and accompanied them. It was already
dark. They put me into a litter with the curtains drawn,
and then arranged themselves in silence, one on each side,[310]
while one brought up the rear. I was taken by surprise:
nothing could be further from my expectation than such an
event. As we passed along, I ruminated with myself on
the line of conduct it was incumbent on me to pursue. To
make an immediate experiment of the fidelity of my guides
was a doubtful attempt. If, for want of time and the opportunity
of a tranquil hearing, I miscarried with them, the
trial would be converted into evidence against me. If I
succeeded, I had then to escape out of Spain, in the centre
of which I now was, from the hostility of a tribunal, which
was said to surpass all the tribunals on the face of the earth
in activity and vigilance. I knew of nothing that the
fathers of the inquisition could have against me. I had
lived in the most entire seclusion; and I could defy
any one to report a single action of mine, since I had entered
Spain, to my prejudice. I had been wholly occupied
with melancholy reflections on the past, and solitary inventions
and devices which I purposed to bring forward for the
future. I determined not to live for ever the slave of fear.
I believed that the best method for defeating a danger, in
many cases, was undauntedly to encounter it; and I did
not imagine that I could have a more favourable opportunity
for that purpose than the present. I had heard much
indeed of the terrors of the inquisition; but a generous and
liberal spirit lends no very attentive ear to horrors, the trite
and vulgar rumour of which only has reached him. I disdained
to be blown down with a breath. I believed that
the inquisition itself would not venture to proceed criminally
against a man against whom nothing criminal had
been alleged. In every event, I believed it would never be
too late to have recourse to my peculiar prerogatives.
Upon entering the prison of the inquisition I was first
conducted to a solitary cell. It is not my intention to treat
of those particulars of the holy office which are already
to be found in innumerable publications. I have no pleasure
in reviving the images of this sojourn of horrors. I
know it is unreasonable to despise a man for the miseries
and wretchedness he has endured; but I know that such is
the human heart, and I will not expose myself to be scoffed
at and trampled upon for my misfortunes. I found myself[311]
under the necessity, while in the inquisition, of submitting
to that most profligate of all impositions, an oath of secrecy
as to what I had seen, and what I had suffered; and, whatever
may be the strict morality of such an obligation, I will
not ambitiously thrust myself forward in violation of it. I
will restrict the story I have to relate to the peculiarities
that characterised my case, and enter as little as possible
into the general policy of this frontier intrenchment of
the Christian faith.
When I was brought up to be interrogated, I was assailed
with innumerable questions, the obvious purport of
which was, as much as possible, to extort from me evidence
of every kind that might be injurious to my cause. The
object of the inquisition is to defend our holy mother, the
church, from whatever might defile her sanctity and whiteness.
Every thing that calls into question the truth of her
doctrines, that pollutes and turns from their original purpose
any of her ordinances, or that implies commerce and league
with the invisible enemy of saints, it is its peculiar province
to investigate. The fathers are therefore particularly cautious
that they may not, by confining their questions too
much to a single object, preclude themselves from the chance
of discovering danger under all the forms it may assume.
It is presumed that he who is a corrupt member of the
church of Christ in one point is unsound and unfaithful in
others.
The inquisitor who examined me, first demanded,
whether I were informed for what cause I was brought
before that tribunal? Whether I did not find myself able
to conjecture the nature of my offence? Whether I did not
know the sort of crimes for which men were detained in
that prison? He then desired me to recollect myself, and
consider, whether I were not conscious of offence against
the holy Catholic church? Whether I had never asserted
or maintained any doctrines contrary to what mother
church asserts and maintains? Whether I had never, to
my knowledge, defiled any of the ordinances of God, or
applied things sacred to unholy and profane purposes?
Whether I had never invocated the devil? Whether I
had never held any commerce, or entered into any league,[312]
with the enemy of saints? Whether I had never performed,
or sought to perform, preternatural and miraculous acts by
unholy means? Whether I had never vexed, or sought to
vex, those against whom I had enmity, by secret and forbidden
arts? Whether I had never resided in countries the
inhabitants of which were heretics, and whether I had never
listened to their discourses and arguments? Whether, when
I inhabited such countries, I had never assisted at the celebration
of divine ordinances performed by heretics, or in a
form which holy church disapproves or condemns?
Finding that he could gain nothing upon me by these
general interrogatories, the inquisitor next descended to
particulars. He enquired concerning the incidents of my
Pisan story, which, having first assured myself from the
train of his questions that some representation of that unfortunate
affair had reached his ear, I willingly related, to
the same extent that I had previously done to the marchese
Filosanto.
He then proceeded to a great number of questions, the
source of which is to be traced to the commonly received
notions respecting sorcerers and necromancers. They were
so artfully contrived, and so large in their scope, that it was
not easy to guess whether they related to any particular accusation
alleged against me, or were formed entirely on
general principles. Yet some of them were so minute, so
connected, and arranged so perfectly in series, that I could
not but believe they were an echo of the calumnies invented
against me at Pisa, of which, however, as I had never collected
any regular and detailed account, I could not accurately
trace the influence on the present occasion.
The inquisitor demanded of me, Whether I had never
seen or held conversation with any supernatural being, or
the spirit of a man departed? Whether I had never practised
diabolical arts to raise the dead? Whether I had
never had a familiar in the form of some insect, domestic
animal, or reptile? He was particularly subtle and copious
in his questions respecting the history of my unfortunate
dog, endeavouring to surprise me in some slip or contradiction
in what I affirmed on the subject. He asked, Whether
I had never assumed a form different from my real one,
either a different age and appearance, or a different species[313]
of animal? Whether I had never, by the agency of
my demon, inflicted sickness, convulsion-fits, or death?
Whether I had never caused the mortality of cattle?
Whether I had not the power of being in two places at
once? Whether I had never been seen riding through the
air? Whether I had never been wounded in my absence,
by a blow aimed at my astral spirit or apparition? Whether
I had never possessed books of conjuration or the art magic?
Whether it had never happened to me that an indifferent
person, indiscreetly perusing a spell or incantation in my
possession, had been maimed or killed by the spirits he had
undesignedly evoked?
A further object particularly pursued in my interrogatory,
was the detection of my property; and the questions constructed
for this purpose were uncommonly artful and
multiplied. The inquisitor told me that the holy office
was, by the nature of its institution, the guardian and administrator
of every person that fell under its animadversion.
Shut up, he said, as I must be, during the pendency
of my cause, and separated from the rest of mankind, I
was wholly incapable of superintending my worldly affairs,
which, unless they were properly looked into, might in the
interval be materially injured. I ought therefore implicitly
and without reserve to refer myself in this point to the
care of the fathers. If my innocence were established, as
he hoped, and earnestly prayed to the mother of God, and
the saints of Jesus, might ultimately happen, I should find
the holy office a faithful and qualified steward. If, on the
contrary, I should be proved a heretic and an alien to the
Most High, I ought then to rejoice in the beneficent interference
of the fathers, who, by dedicating my wealth to
consecrated purposes, would mitigate in the eye of the just
Judge of heaven and earth the duration or fierceness of my
punishments in a future world. The inquisitor had apparently
heard various reports of my riches, and was inexpressibly
chagrined that he should be found so unskilful
a member of his profession, as not to be able to extort from
me a full confession on that head. After having employed
every artifice of menace and terror, after having endeavoured
to soothe and cajole me by blandishments and persuasion,
and finding all his expedients fruitless, he poured[314]
upon me the full storm of his indignation. He said, it
was apparent that I was dealing disingenuously and fraudulently
with the delegated guardians of religion; it was
impossible that the expenditure I was well known more or
less to have incurred could be supported without considerable
funds; and my evident duplicity and concealment in
this point must be regarded as a full confirmation of every
crime my accusers had alleged against me.
In the course of my examinations, the inquisitor who
questioned me gave himself the trouble of entering into a
full vindication of the tribunal of which he was a member.
He said, that every thing that was valuable to mankind,
not only in a future state, but also in the present, depended
upon preserving in full vigour and strength the sacred institutions
of the Christian faith; and that those who were
endowed with powers sufficient for that purpose would be
in the highest degree inexcusable in the sight of God, if
they did not vigilantly and inflexibly maintain the exertion
of those powers. It was an egregious mistake of self-willed
and opinionated men, to suppose that the maintenance of
our holy religion was sufficiently provided for by the clearness
of its evidence. It was no less dangerous, to pretend
that the stability and duration of the church of Christ
might be confided to the providence of God. Providence
acts by human means; and it was presumptuous for those
who neglected the means to trust that they should nevertheless
see the end adequately secured. Why had Providence
thought proper to generate an alliance between church
and state, and to place the powers and authority of human
society in the hands of the adherents of the Christian faith?
Magistrates and governments were thus made the vicars of
Heaven, and great would be their condemnation if they
neglected the trust reposed in them. The great adversary
of mankind was incessantly watchful for the destruction of
souls; and, while he spread abroad his delusions, it was
folly to imagine that evidence alone was powerful enough
to counteract them. What judges were the great mass of
mankind of the integrity and validity of evidence? The jest
of the scorner was ever at hand to turn into ridicule the most
sacred mysteries. The opposers of our holy faith were indefatigable[315]
in their industry, and as anxious in their exertions
to deprive their fellow-men of every comfort and hope,
as if infidelity, which was the curse of the human species,
were the greatest blessing that could be conferred on
them. The devil was a hard task-master, and granted no
vacation, night or day, to those who enlisted themselves in
the support of his cause. It might answer well enough
the purpose of the vain-glorious theorist, to suppose that
man was a rational animal; but they who had regarded
human society with an observing eye knew that it was
otherwise. Delusion would ever be too hard for evidence,
and the grossest falsehoods prove victorious over the most
sacred truths, if what was illiberally and maliciously styled
persecution were not brought in aid of the cause of religion.
The passions of mankind were on the side of falsehood;
man, unrestrained by law, was a wild, ferocious, and most
pernicious beast, and, were it not for the wholesome curb
of authority, would speedily throw off all ties and limitations,
human and divine. Nothing could more clearly
prove, that the heretical followers of Luther and Calvin,
who had lately sprung up for the plague of mankind,
whatever they might pretend, were in reality the determined
enemies of all revelation, than their continual demand,
that the cause should be tried by discussion, and
that every man should be defended in the exercise of his
private judgment. They could not but know,—every
man not totally robbed of all power of discernment must
know,—that, if this demand were once granted, it would
prove a blow at the root of every sentiment of religion.
The inquisition therefore was the most salutary institution
that had ever been devised; and the future welfare of
mankind wholly depended upon the maintenance of its
powers and its maxims. By a moderate and judicious
exhibition of terror, it superseded the necessity of innumerable
punishments. The inquisition was not capricious
and uncertain in its policy; it acted under the direction of
immutable laws; it held a tender, but a firm rein upon the
extravagances and madness of mankind. Nothing was
more notorious, than that a regular and systematical proceeding
was both more effectual and more generous than[316]
one that was fickle. He defied the whole history of the
world to produce an example of so merciful a tribunal.
The great end of its policy was the reclaiming of sinners
and the multiplication of penitents, who, after a gentle
and salutary discipline, were again by holy church received
into her bosom; and even when they delivered the finally
impenitent to the flames, it was to the flames of a purifying
fire, which by destroying the flesh redeemed or diminished
the punishments of a future world. He knew that an outcry
had been artfully raised against the proceedings of the
holy office. But it was easy to see that its enemies, under
the pretence of compassion for its victims, concealed an
inveterate animosity against property, religion, and civil
society. The anabaptists had thrown off the mask, and
discovered their true designs; and the rest were only more
plausible and specious, in proportion as they were more
timid. The present was the most important crisis that
ever occurred in the history of the world. There was a
spirit at work, that aimed at dissolving all the bonds of
civil society, and converting mankind into beasts and
savages. Who had not heard of the levellers, millenarians,
and fifth-monarchy-men, who, under the specious guise of
disinterestedness and an universal love of mankind, had
nothing in view but the most sacrilegious and unprincipled
depredations? It was true that the preachers of these
doctrines were utterly contemptible both for numbers and
talent: but it would be found a short-sighted policy, to
overlook these desperate assailants on account of the poorness
and meanness of their qualifications. For his own
part he did not hesitate to say, that human society would
owe its preservation, if it were preserved, to the merciful
yet vigorous proceedings of the court of inquisition. The
misrepresentations that were invidiously made of the present
firm and vigilant system of policy would be heard for
a day, and then universally abandoned. Posterity, he was
well assured, would do full justice to the sagacity and
soundness of the conduct of this calumniated and much
injured institution.
The reader will forgive me if the panegyric thus elaborately
pronounced by the inquisitor who examined me,[317]
upon the court of which he was a member, had not all the
weight with my mind at the moment I heard it which he
will probably ascribe to it in the calmness of the closet.
It is so difficult to be impartial in our own cause! The
candid mind will no doubt make a large allowance for the
unhappy situation in which I now stood, and the bitter and
galling thoughts that preyed upon my memory. But, if I
am chargeable with temporary injustice in the judgment I
then passed on the arguments of the inquisitor, I flatter
myself that I have been able, after the interval that has
elapsed, to give a true and adequate statement of them.
Beside these reasonings on the necessity of a wholesome
restraint on the privileges of speaking and writing, the
father in another of my examinations condescended to
delineate to me the mysteries of the world of spirits. He
reminded me that in the first grand rebellion upon record,
that of the fallen angels, of which he considered the present
defection under Luther and Calvin as in some measure a
counterpart, a third of the host of heaven had been thrust
out of the celestial mansions. These accursed spirits had
since been permitted to pursue their machinations on
the face of our earth. “The devil, like a roaring lion,
goeth about, seeking whom he may devour.” The oracles
of the heathens, the temptations of Job and of our Saviour,
and the demoniacs of sacred writ, were examples of the
extensive power which Heaven had thought fit to allow
him. Men of a sceptical and feeble understanding had
been tempted to doubt whether this was consistent with
the wisdom and goodness of God. But, though it was in
vain for us to pretend to fathom the depth of the divine
mysteries, there were certain reasons that were sufficiently
obvious to every ingenuous mind. There were persons in
all ages of the world, who, like the Sadducees in the time
of our blessed Saviour, were inclined to affirm “that there
was no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit;” and God
permitted the lying wonders of infernal agents the more
completely to confound the unbelief of his enemies. He
who witnessed the wonderful operations of witchcraft, or
saw the ghost of a man departed, could not doubt of the
interference of invisible agents in the concerns of our[318]
nether world; and, if there were devils and apparitions, it
would be to the last degree unreasonable to deny the existence
of God, or the miracles of Christ. These were to
be received as the grounds of the divine permission of
sorcerers, necromancers, and witches. But the rules of
the divine conduct were not to constitute the rules of ours.
He might permit the agency of invisible malice, because
he saw things upon an unlimited scale, his judgments were
infallible, and he could say to Beelzebub himself, “Thus
far shalt thou go, and no further.” Those to whose care
was intrusted the welfare of mankind here or hereafter
were bound as far as possible to oppose themselves to the
empire of Satan. His power was given him only for a
time, and, if not strictly restrained of God and the powers
ordained of God, it would over-run every thing, and replunge
all this beautiful scene of creation in its original chaos.
There was an endless and eternal war between God and
the devil, and the governors of the church were Heaven’s
field-officers and pioneers for carrying it on. Of all the
crimes, he added, to which the depravity of human nature
had given birth, the most astonishing and the most horrible
was that of diabolical commerce. That human
creatures should be so far infatuated, as to enter into
league with the declared enemy of souls, and for the possession
of a short-lived and precarious power to sign away
their spirits to eternal damnation, was so extraordinary as
to have been wholly unworthy of credit, were it not supported
by evidence as strong and irresistible as that of the
miracles of Jesus Christ himself. The persons who thus
voluntarily made themselves accursed before God deserved
to be regarded with alienation and horror by the whole
human race. Every man that saw them was bound by
his baptismal engagements to destroy them; and whoever
administered to them the smallest portion of food, drink,
or comfort, thereby rendered himself a party to their guilt.
The inquisition especially had declared against this race of
men eternal war, and considered their crime as more complicated,
audacious, and pestilential, than any other branch
of heresy. Having, for his own part, no doubt that I was
one of these noxious and enormous reprobates, he exhorted[319]
me to make a voluntary confession of my evil deeds, and,
by submitting readily to the tortures and punishments of
this world, endeavour to free myself, if it were yet possible,
from those of the world to come.
These discourses of the inquisitor were variously interspersed
through the three examinations to which I was
subjected a short time after I became an inhabitant of the
holy house. On my part I endeavoured to the best of my
power to repel the imputations cast upon me, to establish
my innocence, and to confound the severity of my oppressors.
I told the inquisitor, whatever might be the force of
his arguments respecting heresy and dealings with the devil,
they were nothing to me. I was no Lutheran, no anabaptist,
no necromancer, no underminer of the faith of others, or
ally of the prince of the infernal regions. I proudly and
earnestly demanded to be confronted with my accusers. I
asked my examiner in his turn, What sort of justice that
was, which pretended to proceed capitally against its prisoners
upon secret and unavowed accusations? He endeavoured
to stop me. He told me that I was not brought
there to arraign the methods and practices of their court;
that it did not become a prisoner put upon his defence to
insult his judges; that this contumacy could not be regarded
but as an aggravation of my guilt; and that I was bound
strictly and simply to answer the interrogatories that were
proposed to me. The rebuke of the inquisitor was unavailing.
My spirit was wrought to too high a pitch to be thus
restrained; I was too firmly resolved to give the utmost
force of mind and truth to the topics of my just defence.
It is the practice of the inquisition for the prisoner to sit
during his examination. I started upon my feet.
“The mode of your proceeding,” cried I, “is the mockery
of a trial. From your fatal bar no man can go forth acquitted.
How is a story to be refuted, when hardly and
with difficulty you suffer your prisoner to collect the slightest
fragments of it? If I would detect a calumny, is it not requisite
that I should be acquainted with its history, and
know its authors and propagators? Then I may perhaps be
able to confound their forgeries, to show the groundlessness
of their allegations, to expose the baseness of their purposes[320]
and the profligacy of their characters. I am informed of
nothing; yet I am bid, first to be my own accuser, and then
to answer the accusations of others. It is only by following
a falsehood through all its doublings that it can be effectually
destroyed. You bid me unravel a web, and will not
suffer me to touch it with one of my fingers. The defence
of the purest innocence is often difficult, sometimes impossible,
against the artfulness of a malicious tale, or the
fortuitous concurrence of unfavourable appearances. But
you strip innocence of those consecrated weapons by which
only it can be defended. Give to an accusation the particulars
with which what really happens must always be
attended, give to it the circumstances of place and of time,
lay aside the ambiguity and generalities in which you shelter
yourselves, and then, perhaps then only, it can be victoriously
repelled. You ask me a thousand various and artfully
constructed questions. What sort of a man do you imagine
me to be? I am not a fool, that I should be inveigled; I
am not a boy, that I should be menaced into confessions.
Cease your base and unprincipled arts! I will furnish no
materials against myself. If you know anything against me,
avow it! Propose it, and I will answer. Think not to patch
up a miserable accusation out of the words which inadvertence
or weariness may cause me to utter. Shame on
your institution! May infamy overtake the system of your
proceedings! That religion which is supported by such
means is viler than atheism. That civilisation which has
its basis in despotism, is more worthless and hateful than
the state of savages running wild in their woods.
“Do you not perceive that the language I am now holding
to you is the exclusive privilege of conscious innocence?
The indignation I express is no artificial rage, studiously
contrived to overbear accusation. You have it, as it flows
spontaneously to my tongue, warm from the promptings of
an honest heart. If I could have consulted a friend, it is
probable he would have dissuaded me from my present
demeanour as impolitic. If I were governed by the dictates
of an ordinary prudence, I should have displayed less
ardour, less resentment. But I am willing to try whether
shame cannot yet be lighted up even in the cheek of an
inquisitor.”
[321]
The father who examined me, having in vain endeavoured
to check the current of my invective, changed his manner,
and assumed a tone diametrically the reverse of mine. He
professed that he felt much compassion and interest for my
misfortune, and should deem himself happy if he could be
the instrument of my deliverance. The language I had
uttered was highly indecorous, and such as seemed in itself
to call for a rigorous penance. But he should not think
himself worthy the name of a man, if he did not make suitable
allowance for the bitter and extravagant sentiments,
that would occasionally find their way into the mind of one
in my unfortunate situation. So circumstanced, men would
often mistake their friends for their enemies. I regarded
the inquisition as my enemy: it was in reality my firm and
disinterested friend; zealously watchful for my body, my
soul, and my estate. Other courts had other maxims
of proceeding, because their motives of action were different;
and it was but just that they should furnish their prisoners
with a defence against their frailty. But the breast of an
inquisitor was accessible to no sentiment but that of love;
a burning love of God; love of the church; love of the
prisoner, who might be wrongfully accused; love of the
penitent, whom he reconciled to our common mother, the
church; love even of the incorrigible heretic whose body he
burned for the good of his soul. The inquisitor did not
discover to the prisoner the evidence adduced against him;
that was between God and the inquisitor’s conscience. But
the suppression which was thus practised rendered him
doubly scrupulous and sceptical as to the evidence he received;
he sifted it with a severity that the prisoner would
in vain endeavour to imitate; and the rules of evidence in
that court were so guarded, punctilious, and minute, as to
render any mistake in its proceedings altogether impossible.
For a man to be once a prisoner of the court of inquisition,
by a salutary prejudice which prevailed through the catholic
world, rendered him for ever infamous. This was another
cause of the extreme wariness and caution, with which that
court was accustomed to proceed. They first listened to
the accuser, who was obliged to give in his information on
oath. They then instituted a secret enquiry against the[322]
party accused; and, till they had collected abundant ground
for their proceeding, they did not venture to touch a hair of
his head. They elaborately classed all the different degrees
of evidence into half proof, full proof, proof less than half,
and proof less than full. When these things were duly considered,
it would appear certain that no court that had at any
time existed on earth, had ever been so tender in its proceedings,
so pure in its incitements, and so every way superior
to the attacks of calumny and malice, as the court of
inquisition.
With respect to myself in particular, he said, they had
not apprehended me and put me upon my defence, without
previously assembling a large body of miscellaneous and
circumstantial evidence. The evidence they had drawn
from myself was negative only, but it was strong: the obscurity
that hung about my person, who I was, and whence
I came; and the obscurity that hung about my fortune, a
great visible expenditure in Spain or in Italy, and no visible
means. These were not the signatures and tokens of innocence.
They tended strongly to confirm the accusation
under which I laboured. Yet so tender was the inquisition
in its proceeding, and so chary of its reputation, that upon
these accumulated proofs and presumptions, they were not
prepared to pronounce against me. They would hear me
again and again. They would give me time to recollect
myself, and for this purpose they would order for me a
coarse and scanty fare, and a solitary cell. I might depend
upon it my contumacy should be overcome. The fundamental
principle of their proceedings was borrowed from
that humane and compassionate maxim of the old Roman
law, De vita hominis nulla cunctatio est longa; and I
should accordingly find them free from all precipitation and
impatience, and ready to indulge me with a residence, however
long, in their prisons, till my case had been sifted to
the bottom.

[323]
</div></body></text></TEI>
