<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER IX.
My affairs being thus far adjusted, I took leave of my late
habitation, and set off with my wife and children the same
afternoon. In the evening we arrived at Basle, where we
were permitted to remain that night; and the next morning
were conducted in form out at the north gate of the city,
where our attendants quitted us, with a fresh prohibition
under the severest penalties, if we were found within the
ensuing twelve months in any of the territories of the
Helvetic republic.
Marguerite and myself had already formed our plan.
We began with dismissing both our servants. An attendant
was no longer necessary to me, nor a nurse for the infant.
The suggestion of this measure originated in myself. My
temper at this time, as I have already said, underwent a
striking change. I was resolved to be happy; I was resolved
to be active. It was hard to part with persons so
long familiar to us, and who appeared rather in the character
of humble friends than domestics; but an imperious
necessity demanded it. “Let us,” said I to Marguerite,
“increase and secure our happiness by diminishing our
wants. I will be your husbandman and your labourer;
you may depend upon my perseverance. My education has
fitted me to endure hardship and fatigue, though the hardships
then thought of were of a different nature. You have
ever delighted in active usefulness; and will not, I know,[99]
repine at this accumulation of employment. Let us accommodate
ourselves to our circumstances. Our children, I
perceive, are fated to be peasants, and will therefore be
eminently benefited by the example of patience and independence
we shall set before them.”
The next object of our plan related to the choice of our
future place of residence. This originated with Marguerite.
She had heard much of the beauty and richness of the
country bordering on the lake of Constance, and she
thought that, while we denied ourselves expensive pleasures,
or rather while they were placed out of our reach,
there would be a propriety in our procuring for ourselves a
stock of those pleasures which would cost us nothing. This
was a refinement beyond me, and serves to evince the superiority
which Marguerite’s virtue and force of mind still
retained over mine. The virtue I had so recently adopted
was a strenuous effort. I rather resolved to be happy, than
could strictly be said to be happy. I loved my children
indeed with an unfeigned affection. It was with sincerity
that I professed to prefer them to all earthly possessions.
But vanity and ostentation were habits wrought into my
soul, and might be said to form part of its essence. I could
not, but by the force of constant recollection, keep them out
of my wishes and hopes for the future. I could not, like
Marguerite, suffer my thoughts, as it were, to riot and
wanton in the pleasures of poverty. I could only reconcile
myself to my fate by a sort of gloomy firmness. The tranquillity
I seemed to have attained, was an unnatural state
of my soul, to which it was necessary that I should resolutely
hold myself down, and from which my thoughts
appeared ever upon the alert to escape. Bitter experience
had at length taught me a hard lesson; and that lesson I was
determined to practise, whatever pangs my resignation
might cost me.
We proceeded without hesitation in the direction we had
resolved to pursue. Our whole journey exceeded the space
of forty leagues in extent, and the expense necessarily
attendant upon it (our family, even after its reduction,
consisting of no less than six persons), drained our purse
of a great part of the money which had been supplied to[100]
us by the benevolent senator. But he had agreed to undertake
the disposing of the property we were obliged to leave
behind us, and in the mean time, if any considerable interval
occurred before that was accomplished, to furnish us
with the sums that should be necessary for our subsistence.
We placed the utmost reliance upon his fidelity, and dismissed
from our minds all anxiety respecting the interval
which our banishment had interposed between us and the
resources necessary for our future settlement.
Upon our arrival at Constance, we found a letter from
our friend; and though he transmitted to us no fresh supply,
the complexion of his communication was upon the
whole so encouraging, as to determine us, with no other delay
than that of four days’ rest from our journey, to pass
to the other side of the lake, and explore for ourselves a
situation suitable to our design. The western bank of the
lake, with the exception only of the city of Constance, was
part of the pays conquis of the United Cantons; the eastern
bank was a territory dependent on the government of that
city. It was in this territory that we purposed fixing our
residence; and we trusted, that our affairs would shortly be
put in a train to enable us to take possession of the spot we
should select.
Thus driven once more into flight by the pressure of
misfortune, and compelled to exchange for a land unknown
the scenes which familiarity might have endeared, or tender
recollections have made interesting, we did not sink under
the weight of our adversity. This removal was not like
our last. Switzerland was to none of us endeared like the
vales of St. Leon. I was not now goaded and tormented
by conscious guilt in the degree I had then been; Marguerite
was not afflicted by the spectacle of my misery.
Our present change, though it might be denominated a fall,
was light in comparison with the former. The composure
I had gained was new to me, and had to my own mind all the
gloss of novelty. To my companions it proved contagious;
they were astonished at my serenity, and drew from it an
unwonted lightness of heart.
Thus circumstanced, our tour had its charms for us all;
and there are few passages of my life that I have felt more[101]
agreeably. The lake itself is uncommonly beautiful, and its
environs are fertile and interesting. It is surrounded with
an abundance of towns, villages, country seats, and monasteries,
sufficient to adorn and diversify the view, but not to
exclude the sweetness of a rural scenery, or the grand features
of nature. We coasted a considerable part of the lake,
that we might judge in some degree, previously to our landing,
which part of the shore promised best to yield us the
object we sought. The autumn was now commencing; the
air was liquid and sweet; the foliage was rich and varied;
and the vine-covered hills exhibited a warmth and luxuriance
of colouring, that no other object of nature or art is
able to cope with. Surrounded with these objects, I sat in
my boat in the midst of my children; and, as I was but
just awakened to an observation of their worth and my own
happiness, I viewed them with a transport that would be ill
illustrated by being compared with the transport of a miser
over his new-recovered treasure from the bowels of the
deep.
O poverty! exclaimed I, with elevated and unconquerable
emotion, if these are the delights that attend thee, willingly
will I resign the pomp of palaces and the splendour
of rank to whoever shall deem them worth his acceptance!
Henceforth I desire only to dedicate myself to the simplicity
of nature and the genuine sentiments of the heart. I
will enjoy the beauty of scenes cultivated by other hands
than mine, or that are spread out before me by the Author
of the universe. I will sit in the midst of my children, and
revel in the luxury of domestic affections; pleasures these,
that may be incumbered, but cannot be heightened, by all
that wealth has in its power to bestow! Wealth serves no
other purpose than to deprave the soul, and adulterate the
fountains of genuine delight.
Such was the spirit of exultation with which my mind
was at this time filled. I am sensible that it was only
calculated to be transitory. I might learn to be contented;
I was not formed to be satisfied in obscurity and a low
estate.
Thus happy, and thus amused, we spent two days in
coasting the lake, landing frequently for the purposes either[102]
of variety or enquiry, and regularly passing the night on
shore. On the evening of the second day we were struck
with the neat appearance and pleasing situation of a cottage,
which we discovered in our rambles, about a mile and a
half from the lake. We found that it was to be sold, and
it seemed precisely to correspond with the wishes we had
formed. It was at a considerable distance from any populous
neighbourhood, the nearest town being that of Merspurg,
the usual residence of the bishops of Constance,
which was distant from this spot not less than three leagues.
The cottage was situated in a valley; the hills being for
the most part crowned with rich and verdant foliage, their
sides covered with vineyards and corn, and a clear transparent
rivulet murmuring along from east to west. In the
distance a few similar cottages discovered themselves, and
in front there was an opening between the hills, just wide
enough to show us a few sails as they floated along the now
even surface of the lake. We approached the cottage, and
found in it only one person, an interesting girl of nineteen,
who had resided there from her birth, and had been employed
for the last four years in attendance upon the closing
scene of her mother. Her mother had been dead only
a few weeks, and she was upon the point of removing, as
she told us, to the house of a brother, the best creature in
the world, who was already married, and had a family of
children. While we were talking with her, we perceived a
fine boy of about eleven years of age skipping along the
meadow. He proved to be her nephew, and hastened to
say that his father and Mr. Henry were just behind, and
would be with her in a few minutes. We waited their
arrival; and it was easy to see that Mr. Henry was by no
means an indifferent object in the eyes of the beautiful orphan:
she had probably conditioned that he should permit
her to remain single as long as she could be of any use to
her mother. The lovers were well satisfied that the girl’s
brother should be taken aside, that I might talk over with
him the affair of the cottage. We made a tour of the fields
that were part of the property of the deceased, and the
terms of our intended purchase were easily adjusted.
Though we had now accomplished the immediate purpose[103]
of our expedition, yet, as we had found unusual exhilaration
and sweetness in the objects it presented to us, we
came to a resolution of continuing it still further, and completing
the circuit of the lake. We were aware that it
would be vain as yet to expect to receive the money requisite
for completing our purchase; and as no pleasure,
merely in the way of relaxation, could be more delightful
than that we were now enjoying, so was it impossible
that we could fill up our time in a more frugal manner than
in this little voyage. Our gratification was not less, but
more perfect, because it consisted of simple, inartificial,
unbought amusements. The scenes around us were refreshing
and invigorating; they were calculated, temporarily at
least, to inspire gaiety and youth into decrepitude itself.
Amidst these scenes we forgot our sorrows; they were a
kind of stream, in which weariness and dejection plunged
their limbs, and came forth untired and alert. They
awakened in the mind all its most pleasing associations.
Having already, as we believed, chosen the place of our
future residence, we busied ourselves in imagining all the
accompaniments that would grow out of it. We determined
that poverty with health would not fail to be attended
with its portion of pleasures. The scenes of nature were
all our own; nor could wealth give them a more perfect,
or a firmer, appropriation. The affections and charities of
habitude and consanguinity we trusted we should feel uninterrupted;
unincumbered with the ceremonies and trappings
of life, and in that rural plainness which is their
genial soil.
After a leisurely and delightful voyage of six days, we
returned to Constance. We expected to have found on our
return some further intelligence from the beneficent senator,
but in this we were disappointed. The imagination however
easily suggested to us a variety of circumstances that
might have delayed the business he had undertaken; and
it was no forced inference to suppose that he deferred writing,
because he had nothing important to communicate.
At first therefore we suffered little uneasiness from the
delay; but as time proceeded, and the silence of our protector
continued, the affair began to assume a more serious[104]
aspect. The little stock we had brought with us in our
exile was in a rapid progress of decay. We had managed
it with frugality; though not at first with that anxious solicitude,
the necessity of which we now began to apprehend.
We had procured for ourselves two small and inconvenient
apartments in an obscure alley of the city of Constance.
We were in the act of meditating what steps it would be
necessary to take in this unfortunate emergency, when intelligence
was brought us of the sudden decease of the
person upon whose kindness and exertions we depended.
He was succeeded in his estate by his nephew, a man of
whom we had heard something during our residence in the
neighbourhood, and whose habits we understood to be diametrically
the reverse of his predecessor’s. In short, he
had been represented to us as illiberal, morose, selfish, and
litigious; a man who, having suffered in one part of his
life the hardships of poverty, scrupled no means, honourable
or otherwise, of removing it to the greatest practicable
distance. He had already reaped the succession some weeks,
when we heard of the event that put him in possession of
it; and the letters which I had more than once addressed
to our protector had probably fallen into his hands. These
circumstances afforded no favourable augury of the treatment
we might expect from him. The first thing which
seemed proper was to write to him, which I accordingly
did. I acquainted him with the nature of the transaction
between myself and his uncle, and signified how necessary
it was that we should come to a conclusion as speedily as
possible. I represented to him pathetically the condition
to which I was born, and the opulence in which I had
passed many years of my life, together with the contrast
afforded by the present reduced and urgent circumstances
of my family. I entreated him to exert his generosity and
justice in behalf of an unfortunate exile, whom untoward
events had deprived of the power of doing justice to himself.
To this letter I received no answer. Uncertain as to the
cause of my correspondent’s silence, or even whether my
letter had been received, I wrote again. My heart was
wrung with this new adversity. I was forbidden, under[105]
pain of perpetual imprisonment, to return to the territories
of the republic, and I had no friend to solicit in my behalf.
In Constance I was utterly a stranger. In Switzerland, my
unfortunate habits of life, the depression and solitude in
which I had been merged, deprived me of the opportunity
of forming connections. The deceased was the only person
who had been disposed to interfere for me. It was too
probable that the silence of his successor was an indication
of the hostility of his views. I saw nothing before me but
the prospect of my family perishing with want, deprived
of their last resource, exiles and pennyless. Thus destitute
and forlorn, what could we do? to what plan could we have
recourse? We had not so much as the means of providing
ourselves with the implements of the humblest labour. If
we had, could I, under my circumstances, resolve upon
this? Could I give up the last slender pittance of my
children while there was a chance of recovering it; and, by
surrendering them to the slavery of perpetual labour, devote
them to the lowest degree of ignorance and degradation?
No; I still clung to this final hope, and was resolved to
undertake any thing, however desperate, rather than part
with it. Such were my feelings; and, in the new letter
which I now despatched, I poured out all the anguish of
my soul.
A reply to this letter was at length vouchsafed. The
heir of my protector informed me, that he knew nothing of
the business to which I alluded; that he had come into
possession of the lands I described, together with the other
property of his late uncle, and regarded himself as holding
them by the same tenure; that he found in the accounts of
the estate a sum of money advanced to me, which he might
with the strictest justice regard as a debt, and pursue me
for it accordingly. He should be liberal enough however
so far to give credit to my story, and to consider the sum
in question as advanced upon a pledge of land: in that case,
I might regard myself as sufficiently fortunate in having
obtained even that amount at a time when, but for the humanity
or weakness of his uncle, my estate would not have
sold for a farthing. Meanwhile, the forbearance which he
proffered would, he observed, depend upon my conduct, and[106]
be retracted if I afforded him cause for resentment. He
added, that he despised my menaces and commands, and
that, if I took a single step against him, I should find it
terminate in my utter ruin.
Nothing could be more profligate than the style of his
letter. But its impotence was equal to its wickedness. It
was absurd to threaten to inflict ruin on a man whom ruin
had already overtaken. Before the letter arrived, I had
disbursed the whole sum I brought with me from Switzerland.
This entire annihilation of my resources seemed to
steal on me unperceived. Finding that all reply to my
importunity was either refused, or deferred to an uncertain
period, I would willingly at all risks have sought the villain
who thus obdurately devoted me and my family to destruction,
and have endeavoured to obtain justice in person. But
it was now too late. Before I felt the case thus desperate,
my finances were so far reduced as to make it impracticable
for me to leave my wife and children enough to support
them in my absence, even if I had determined myself to
set out upon this perilous expedition pennyless. I resolved
that, if we did perish, we would perish together.
Penury was now advancing upon us with such rapid
strides, that the lowest and most scanty resources no longer
admitted of neglect. Had a case thus desperate been encountered
with timely attention, it is not improbable that
some of the various talents I had acquired in the course of
my education would have furnished me with a means of
subsistence not altogether plebeian or incompetent. But,
with the uncertainty of my situation, and totally unaccustomed
as I was to regard my person or mind as a machine
fitted for productive labour, I had not looked to this question,
till the urgency of the case deprived me of every advantage
I might otherwise have seized. I was glad therefore
to have recourse to menial occupation, and sought
employment under the gardener of the episcopal palace, for
whose service I was sufficiently qualified by my ten years’
retreat in the Bordelois. That I might better adapt myself
to the painful necessity of my situation, I previously exchanged
some of my own clothes for garments more suitable
to the business I now solicited. It was not till I had arrived[107]
within a very few days to the end of my resources;
that even this expedient, by a sort of accident, recurred to
my mind. Marguerite, though fully aware of the urgency
of the case, had, as she afterwards told me, imposed on
herself a compulsory silence, fearing for the inflamed and
irritated frame of my mind, and aware that the course of
events would ultimately lead me to a point with which she
dreaded to intermeddle. This was for her a trying moment;
my lately recovered insanity obliging her to contemplate
in silence our growing distress, and to wait the attack
of hunger and want that threatened to destroy us, with an
apparent tranquillity and cheerfulness.
For me, so entire a revolution had taken place in my
sentiments, that I spurned with contempt, so far as related
to myself, that pride of rank and romantic gallantry of
honour, which had formerly been my idols. I submitted
with a sort of gloomy contentment to the situation upon
which my destiny drove me. I regarded it as the natural
result of my former misconduct; and derived a sentiment of
ease and relief from thus expiating, as it were, with the
sweat of my brow, the temptations to which I had yielded.
Had I been myself only reduced thus low, or had the produce
of my labour been sufficient to purchase competence
for my wife and the means of instruction for my family, I
can safely affirm that I should have found no consequence
so direct from my own degradation as the means of silencing
the reproaches of conscience and reconciling me to myself.
But when I returned in the evening with the earnings of
my day’s labour, and found it incompetent to the procuring
for those who depended on me the simplest means of subsistence,
then indeed my sensations were different. My
heart died within me. I did not return after the fatigues
of the day, which, to me who had not been accustomed to
unremitted labour, and who now began to feel that I was
not so young as I had been at the siege of Pavia, were extremely
trying,—I did not return, I say, to a night of
repose. I became a very woman when I looked forward,
and endeavoured to picture to myself the future situation of
my family. I watered my pillow with my tears. Often,
when I imagined that my whole family were asleep, I gave[108]
vent to my perturbated and distracted mind in groans:
Marguerite would sometimes overhear me; and with the
gentlest suggestions of her admirable mind would endeavour
to soothe my thoughts to peace. For the present, as
I have said, my earnings were incompetent, and we found
it necessary to supply the deficiency by the sale of the few
garments, not in immediate use, that we still possessed.
What then would be the case when these were gone, and
when, in addition to this, it would be necessary to purchase
not only food to eat, and a roof to shelter, but also
clothes to cover us?
</div></body></text></TEI>
