<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
CHAPTER XIII.
Another source of uneasiness was added to the distraction
my mind already endured. The stranger did not appear.
It was in the morning that the officers of justice arrived;
they departed about noon; and in two hours afterwards I
entered the wood in search of my guest. The wood was
of some leagues in extent; it was intersected by paths in
various directions; it was interspersed with caverns; its
growth was of all kinds,—in some places lofty trees that
seemed to form a support for the clouds, in others an underwood
impenetrable alike to the feet and to the eye. As
I entered the wood, I however conceived that the discovery
of the stranger, to me who was acquainted with its lurking-places,
would be an affair of little toil; his feebleness and
decrepitude would not suffer him to proceed to any great
distance. In this I was mistaken. I looked carefully on[150]
all sides; I examined every recess and corner with which
I was acquainted: but I found no trace of the stranger.
The scene was so complicated and involved, that even this
was a labour of considerable duration. At length I became
satisfied that he was not in the nearer division of the
wood.
I paused. I felt at once that it was little less than a
Herculean task to hunt through the whole of its dimensions.
It would probably be of little use to call, and endeavour
by that means to discover his retreat. I knew of
no name by which he was to be recognised; and, if my own
voice was but a slight resource to penetrate this immense
labyrinth of foliage, the voice of the stranger, weakened by
age, and now probably still more enfeebled by hunger and
fatigue, could not be expected to make itself heard. Beside
which, as I knew not what the source of information had
been to the officers who had just left me, I was unwilling
to expose my guest to the danger that might arise from this
mode of seeking him. I could not even be sure, though I
had seen their boat stand off from the shore, that they might
not afterwards land one or more of their party, and be at
this very moment within ear-shot of me. I therefore proceeded
in anxiety and silence.
My search was no more successful in the part of the
wood with which I was little acquainted, than in the part
with which I was most familiar. I had already been engaged
four hours in the task, and night began to come on.
It shut in with heavy clouds, that on all sides appeared
deeply loaded with rain. I now began to consider my own
situation; and, by comparing circumstances, found that I
was at a great distance from my own habitation. There
was no direct path by which for me to return. I had proceeded
to the right and the left, backward and forward,
sometimes by more open paths, and sometimes forcing my
way through briars and brushwood, as caprice, or the hope
of effecting the object of my search, happened to guide me.
It was therefore no easy matter to guess how I was to
return, or even, now that the lowering clouds had covered
the horizon with one uniform tint, in which direction lay
the cottage or the lake. While I stood contemplating what[151]
was to be done, I heard the howling of the wolves at a distance;
and their howl had that particular melancholy and
discomfiting sound which is well known to precede a coming
storm. There was no time to be lost, and accordingly
I set out. I was less anxious to be at home on my own
account, than for the sake of quieting the alarms of my
family, to whom I had already occasioned too great a portion
of uneasiness.
I had not proceeded far before the rain descended in
torrents, intermingled with peals of thunder and sheets of
lightning. The thunder, interrupted, as it were, from time
to time, with the noise of the wild beasts that inhabited the
wood, deafened me, while the excessive and instantaneous
brilliancy of the lightning occasioned me an intolerable
aching in the organ of sight. It rained incessantly for two
hours, and I found myself drenched and fatigued with the
wet. During this time my progress was small; and I was
ever and anon intercepted by the underwood, and could not
without repeated experiments discover the means of proceeding.
At length the rain subsided, and seemed to give
place to a gloomy and motionless calm. Soon after, I discovered
a light at a distance, and advanced towards it. As
I approached, I perceived that it proceeded from a set of
banditti, to the amount of fourteen or fifteen persons, sitting
round a fire in the mouth of a cavern. I was glad to turn
my steps another way, and was for some time afraid that
the noise I made in occasionally forcing my way through
the bushes would alarm them, and cost me my life. I
however fortunately escaped their notice. This was in a
part of the wood remote from the path I ought to have
taken, and near the road to Lindau.
The day began to dawn before I reached my own habitation.
The conjecture I had made, when I was unawares
upon the point of falling into the hands of the banditti,
that the road of Lindau was on the other side of their retreat,
was of some service to me as an indication where to
find the cottage and the lake. This road skirted the wood
on the side nearly opposite to that by which I entered it.
The difficulties however I had to encounter were inconceivably
great, in endeavouring to preserve my line of direction.[152]
After having been compelled four or five times to deviate
from the line, it is seldom that a traveller will find himself
right in his conjecture as to the direction he is pursuing,
unless he has some sensible object as a sort of pole-star by
which to govern his route. It happened in this instance
that I was more fortunate than I was entitled to expect. I
laboured indeed till daybreak without getting out of the
labyrinth that inclosed me. But the sun no sooner began
to lend an imperfect light, than I recognised certain objects
which upon some former occasions I had observed, and
perceived that my journey was nearly at an end. I entered
my cottage, and found Marguerite alone awake and expecting
me.
She had been somewhat uneasy on account of my absence,
both from the extreme tempestuousness of the night,
and in consequence of the painful sensations the events of
the preceding morning had introduced,—events with which
it was almost unavoidable for her to imagine that my absence
was in some way connected. The period of my insanity
in Switzerland might indeed have accustomed her
to the irregularity of my motions, but a term of more than
six years which had intervened, had produced in her expectations
and habits of a different sort. I related to this
admirable woman the adventures of the night and the fruitlessness
of the search in which I had been engaged; and
this openness of communication, unresembling the nature
of the intercourse which had lately existed between us, relieved
in some degree my burthened heart, and cheered the
drooping spirits of Marguerite. She dropped some consolatory
and sadly pleasing tears; and her manner seemed to
say, though she would not suffer her tongue to give the idea
words, How sweet are cordiality and confidence! Oh! do
not let our situation, which has deprived us of many other
comforts, ever again be robbed of this comfort, which is
alone worth all the rest! Though she necessarily felt the
presence of the stranger as an evil, the bane of our domestic
peace, yet it was impossible for her not to compassionate
his fate, and suffer some distress from his strange and
abrupt disappearance.
After the conversation which had so eminently served as[153]
a relief to our minds, Marguerite left me to repose myself
from the extraordinary fatigue I had undergone. But my
mind was too much disturbed to suffer me to sink into the
arms of forgetfulness. I felt something tragical in the sad
destiny of my unfortunate guest. It was but too probable
that, in his peculiarly weak state of body, and with his declining
health, the being thus exposed for a day and a night
to the effects of hunger, of the inclemency of the air, and
the tempestuousness of the elements, would put a close to
his existence. I was determined soon to recommence my
search. But how could I be sure that I should be more
fortunate to-day, than the day before? If I found him, it
was most likely I should find him either dead or dying.
The degree of intercourse that had taken place between us
had made him occupy a considerable space in my thoughts.
The prospects he had opened to me, the conduct he had
induced me to adopt, the painful effects and dissatisfaction
of mind which had been produced by that conduct as it
respected my family, all combined to give me an interest
in his fate. I had seen his talents; I had felt his ascendancy;
I had experienced that sort of conflict, which appearances
of guilt on the one hand, and asseverations of
innocence on the other, are calculated to produce in the
thoughts and emotions of a bystander. He was no common
man; the expectations and conjectures he excited were
of no ordinary sort; and I felt that an army might be
destroyed, and a spacious plain covered with the wounded
and the dying, without producing greater commotion in my
soul.
In the anxious and disturbed state of mind in which I
was, the thoughts flow with extraordinary rapidity. It will
be found attended with a strange, and, previously to the
experiment, incredible mixture of reasoning and passion, of
philosophising and fury. I was accordingly conscious at
this moment of the truth of the stranger’s assertion, that in
me he had a protector, not a friend. Friendship is an object
of a peculiar sort; the smallest reserve is deadly to it.
I may indeed feel the emotions of a friend towards a man
who in part conceals from me the thoughts of his heart;
but then I must be unconscious of this concealment. The[154]
instant I perceive this limitation of confidence, he drops
into the class of ordinary men: a divorce is effected between
us: our hearts, which grew together, suffer amputation;
the arteries are closed; the blood is no longer
mutually transfused and confounded. I shall be conscious
of all his qualities, for I stand in the place of an impartial
umpire. I consider him as a machine capable of so much
utility to myself, and so much utility to other men. But
I do not regard him as the brother of my soul: I do not
feel that my life is bound up in his: I do not feel as if,
were he to die, the whole world would be at an end to me,
and that my happiness would be buried with him for ever
in the darkness of the grave. I am not conscious of those
emotions which are the most exquisite and indescribable
the human mind can experience; and which, being communicated
by a sort of electrical stroke to him who is their
object, constitute the solace of all his cares, the alleviator
of all his calamities, the only nectar and truest balm of
human life. For me, he stands alone in the world, having
companions and associates, the connections, as it were, of
mercantile selfishness, or casual jollity and good humour,
but no friend. It was thus that I thought of the stranger.
He obtained from me the compassion due to a human being,
and the respect extorted by his qualities, but nothing calculated
radically to disturb the equilibrium of the mind. I
looked forward to his death with unruffled thoughts and an
unmoistened eye. There was one thing indeed that shook
me more deeply; the thought of losing the promised reward,
and of having exposed myself to the evil of an unquiet and
dissatisfied mind in vain.
I rested but a few hours before I set out again upon the
search, to which the interposition of the darkness of the
preceding night had put an abrupt close. I had the precaution
to take with me a slight provision of food and cordials,
believing that, if I found the stranger, he would at
least be in the greatest need of something reviving and restorative.
Charles earnestly intreated to assist me in the
search, but upon this I put a peremptory prohibition. It
would have been in direct contradiction to what the stranger
had most solemnly required of me.
[155]
I had already spent several hours in anxiously tracing
the wood in every direction; and the period of noon was
past, when, approaching an obscure and almost impenetrable
thicket, my ear was caught by a low and melancholy sound,
which at first I knew not to what I was to ascribe. It
however arrested my attention, and caused me to assume
an attitude of listening. After the lapse of little more than
a minute, the same sound was repeated. I now distinctly
perceived that it was the groan of some creature in a very
feeble and exhausted state, and immediately suspected that
it was the stranger. I went almost round the thicket before
I could discern an entrance, and, though I looked with the
utmost care, could perceive nothing that the thicket inclosed.
The groan was repeated a third time. The long intervals
between the groans gave a peculiar melancholy to the effect,
and each seemed so much lower than the groan before, that
nothing but the ear of anxious attention would have caught
it; at the same time that the tone conveyed an idea of stupified,
yet vital, anguish. At length I perceived the legs
and something of the garb of a man. It was the stranger!
He appeared to have crept into the thicket upon his hands
and knees. When I forced my way to him, he seemed in
the very act of expiring. He was lying on his face, and I
raised him a little. His eyes were fixed; his mouth was
open; his lips and tongue were parched and dry. I infused
a few drops of a cordial into his mouth. For a moment
it appeared to produce no sensation, but presently my
patient uttered a deep and long-drawn sigh. I repeated my
application. As a principal cause of the condition in which
I found him was inanition, the stimulant I administered
produced a powerful effect. He moved his hands, shuddered,
turned his eyes languidly upon me, and, having appeared
to recognise me, shut them hastily again. I moved
him slowly and softly into a freer air, and bathed his temples
with one of the liquids I had about me. By this time he
looked up, and then suddenly round him with a wild and
hurried air. He spoke not however; he was speechless.
In about a quarter of an hour he relapsed into convulsions,
in which it seemed probable he would expire. They lasted
a considerable time, and he then sunk into a state of insensibility.[156]
I thought he was dead. Thus circumstanced, it
was some relief to my humanity to have found him yet
alive, and to have received his parting breath. But in a
moment his secret and his promises recurred to me with
inexpressible anguish, and I inwardly reproached him for
having deferred his communication so long, as now to preclude
its ever being made. I cannot describe the keenness,
the burning and intolerable bitterness, of my sensation.
Keen it may well be supposed to have been, from its having
so instantaneously and forcibly recurred at a time when
other objects seemed to press upon my senses. No one
who has not felt what it is to fall in a moment from hope,
or, as I should rather say, from assured possession of what
his soul most loved and desired, into black and interminable
despair, can imagine what was then the state of my mind.
The body of my patient slided from my nerveless arms; I
lifted up the eyes of rage and phrensy, as if to curse the Author
of my being; and then fell helpless and immoveable
by the side of the stranger.
I felt him move; I heard him sigh. I lifted up my
head, and perceived stronger marks of life and sense about
him than had yet displayed themselves. I threw my arms
about him; I pressed him to my heart. The emphatical
gesture I used seemed to have a sort of magnetical force to
rouse his dying powers. With a little assistance from me
he sat upright. My assiduity produced wonders: it fortunately
happened that this thicket was but a half a mile
from my habitation, and indeed was one of the spots
which I had searched without success the day before.
About the hour of sunset, partly by leading, and partly
by supporting him, I restored my guest to his former apartment.
He remained speechless, or nearly so. He vented his
sensations in sighs, in inward and inarticulate sounds; and
even when he arrived at the power of making himself understood
by words, it was only by monosyllables and half
sentences that he conveyed to me his meaning. I now gave
up my time almost entirely to an assiduous attendance on
the stranger. Every day I expected to be his last; every
day was more or less interspersed with symptoms that[157]
seemed to menace his instant dissolution. During all this
time I remained in the anxious suspense of contending hope
and fear. Was it probable that he would ever recover
strength enough to confer on me the legacy he had announced?
The particulars of his secret I knew not; but,
judging from what I had heard of the pretences and pursuits
of alchemy, it was natural to suppose that he had a
process to communicate, which would require on his part
considerable accuracy of recollection, as well as the power
of delivering himself in a methodical and orderly discourse.
I was fortunate enough however to perceive, after a tormenting
and tedious crisis, that he appeared to be in a progress
of convalescence, and that his strength both of body
and mind were recruited daily. After the lapse of a fortnight
from the adventure of the wood, he one evening
addressed me in the following manner:—
“St. Leon, I have been to blame. I have put you to a
sufficient trial; I have received from you every assistance
and kindness that my situation demanded; I have imposed
on you much trouble and anxiety; I have excited your
expectations by announcing to you in part what it was in
my power to bestow; and I have finally risked the defrauding
your hopes and your humanity of their just reward.
Do me the justice however to remember, that I had no
presentiment of the event which has so inauspiciously come
between you and your hopes. Fool that I was, I imagined
I had suffered enough, and that, as I had obtained a longer
respite from external persecution than I almost ever experienced,
I should be permitted to spend the short remainder
of my days uninterrupted! I now however look back upon
this last assault with complacency. It has cut off something
from the last remnant of a life to the close of which
I look forward with inexpressible longing; at the same
time that I am still in prospect of obtaining the final wish
of my heart—the stealing out of the world unperceived, and
thus in some measure eluding the last malice of my enemies.
After my death I have but one injunction to leave
with you—the injunction of Hercules to Philoctetes—that
no inducement may move you to betray to mortal man the
place in which you shall have deposited my ashes. Bury[158]
them in a spot which I will describe to you: it is not far,
and is only recommended to me by its almost inaccessible
situation: and that once done, speak of me and, if possible,
think of me no more. Never on any account mention me
or allude to me; never describe me, or relate the manner of
our meeting, or the adventure which has at length brought
on the desired close of my existence.
“Believe me, in the feeble and helpless condition in which
I have spent the last fortnight, your wishes and expectations
have been uppermost in my mind, and there is
nothing I have felt with so much compunction as the danger
of leaving them unsatisfied. To you perhaps I at present
appear to be rapidly recovering, I feel the dart of
death in my vitals; I know I shall not live four days. It
is necessary therefore that I should finish without delay all
that remains for me to finish. I will devote this night to
the arranging my thoughts and putting in order what I have
to communicate, that no mistake or omission may have part
in a transaction so important. Come to me to-morrow
morning; I will be prepared for you.”
As soon as I heard this discourse, and provided the stranger
with every thing he could want during the night, I withdrew.
My heart was big with expectation; my thoughts
all night were wild and tumultuous. When the hour of
assignation arrived, I hastened along the garden to the
summer-house, conscious that upon that hour depended all
the colour of my future life. Since the stranger had been
in his present dangerous condition, the door was not bolted;
it was only locked: the key was in my possession, and
remained night and day attached to my person. I opened
the door; I panted and was breathless.
I immediately saw that the stranger had undergone some
great alteration for the worse. He had suffered a sort of
paralytic affection. He lifted up his face as I entered; it
was paler than I had ever seen it. He shook his head
mournfully, and intimated by signs the disappointment
which this morning must witness. He was speechless.
“Fate! fate!” exclaimed I in an agony of despair, “am I to
be for ever baffled? Is the prize so much longed for and so
ardently expected at last to escape me?”—It is not to be[159]
imagined how much these successive, endless disappointments
increased my impatience, and magnified in my eyes
the donation I sought.
The whole of this and the following day the stranger
remained speechless. The third day, in the morning, he
murmured many sounds, but in a manner so excessively
inarticulate, that I was not able to understand one word in
six that he said. I recollected his prediction that he should
die on the fourth day. The fever of my soul was at its
height. Mortal sinews and fibres could sustain no more.
If the stranger had died thus, it is most probable that I
should have thrown myself in anguish and rage upon his
corpse, and have expired in the same hour.
In the evening of the third day I visited him again. He
had thrown his robe around him, and was sitting on the side
of his couch. The evening sun shot his last beams over
the window-shutters. There were about eight inches between
the shutter and the top of the window; and some
branches of vines, with their grapes already ripe, broke the
uniformity of the light. The side of the couch faced the
west, and the beams played upon the old man’s countenance.
I had never seen it so serene. The light, already softened
by the decline of day, gave it a peculiar animation: and a
smile that seemed to betoken renovation and the youth of
angels sat upon it. He beckoned me to approach. I
placed myself beside him on the couch; he took my hand
in his, and leaned his face towards me.
“I shall never witness the light of the setting sun
again!” were the first words he uttered. I immediately
perceived that he spoke more collectedly, and with better
articulation than at any time since the paralytic stroke.
Still however it was no easy matter to develop his words.
But I wound up every faculty of my frame to catch them;
and, assisted as I was by the habit of listening to his
speech for many weeks, which during the whole of that
time had never been distinct, I was successful enough to
make out his entire discourse.
It continued, though with various interruptions, for more
than half an hour. He explained with wonderful accuracy
the whole of his secrets, and the process with which they[160]
were connected. My soul was roused to the utmost stretch
of attention and astonishment. His secrets, as I have
already announced in the commencement of this history,
consisted of two principal particulars; the art of multiplying
gold, and the power of living for ever. The detail of these
secrets I omit; into that I am forbidden to enter. My
design in writing this narrative, I have said, is not to teach
the art of which I am in possession, but to describe the
adventures it produced to me.
The more I listened, the more my astonishment grew.
I looked at the old man before me; I observed the wretchedness
of his appearance, the meanness of his attire, his
apparent old age, his extreme feebleness, the characters
of approaching death that were written on his countenance.
After what I had just heard, I surveyed these things with
a sensation of novelty, as if I had never remarked them in
him before. I said to myself, Is this the man that possesses
mines of wealth inexhaustible, and the capacity of living for
ever?
Observing that he had finished his discourse, I addressed
to him these words, by a sort of uncontrollable impulse,
and with all the vehemence of unsated and insuppressible
curiosity.
“Tell me, I adjure you by the living God, what use
have you made of these extraordinary gifts? and with what
events has that use been attended?”
As I spoke thus, the countenance of the old man underwent
a surprising change. Its serenity vanished; his
eyes rolled with an expression of agony; and he answered
me thus:—
“Be silent, St. Leon! How often must I tell you that
no single incident of my story shall ever be repeated! Have
I no claim upon your forbearance? Can you be barbarous
and inhuman enough to disturb my last scene with these
bitter recollections?”—I was silent.
This is all that is material that passed at our interview.
The stranger died the next day, and was buried according
to his instructions.

[161]
</div></body></text></TEI>
