<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="18">
CHAPTER XVIII.
For some time I could not believe him departed. When I
retired to rest, I felt the want of Charles to press my hand,
and wish me refreshing slumbers; and I passed on, sad
and solitary, to my chamber. When I came next morning[196]
into the breakfasting room, Charles was not there, to
greet me with looks of affection and duty; and the gilding
and ornaments of the apartment were to me no less disconsolate
than the damps and sootiness of a dungeon.
I hoped he would return. I knew how tenderly he was
attached to his mother and his sisters; I was fully convinced
that the affection for me which had been the perpetual
habit of his mind, could not be entirely eradicated
from his heart. I mentioned him not in my letters to
Constance; the pen lingered, my hand trembled, when I
thought of him; I could neither pretend that he was with
me, nor announce the catastrophe of his absence. But I
opened the letters of Marguerite with still increasing impatience.
Finding that he did not return to me, I hoped
that some alteration of the extraordinary resolution he had
formed, would lead him to Constance. In vain I hoped!
There reached me, by no conveyance, from no quarter,
tidings of my son!
How surprising an event! A youth, not seventeen years
of age, forming and executing in the same instant the purpose
of flying from his parents and his family! Deserting
all his hopes, all his attachments, all his fortune! Refusing
the smallest particle of assistance or provision in his entrance
upon the wide scene of the world! Oh, Charles! exclaimed
I, you are indeed an extraordinary and admirable youth!
But are you fortified against all the temptations of the world
and all its hardships? Do your tender years qualify you to
struggle with its unkindness, its indifference, and its insults?
In how few quarters is merit ever treated with the attention
and benevolence it deserves! How often is it reduced to
tremble with indignation, at the scoffs and brutality to which
it is exposed, and at the sight of folly and vice exalted in
its stead, and appointed its despot and its master! My son,
my son! what will be your fate? Is your unseasoned
frame reserved to perish by hunger, in barren deserts and
beneath inclement skies? Will you not in some hour of
bitter disappointment and unpitied loneliness, lay yourself
down in despair and die? Will you not be made the slave
of some capricious tyrant for bread? Generous as is your
nature, will it be eternally proof against reiterated temptation?[197]
Upon what a world are you turned adrift! a world
of which you know as little, as the poor affrighted soul of a
dying man knows, when launching into the mysterious,
impenetrable abyss of eternity! Unnatural father, to have
reduced my only son to this cruel alternative! I should
with a less aching and agonising heart have accompanied
his senseless remains to the grave. Dreadful as that parting
is, there at least the anxious mind of the survivor has
rest. There are no thoughts and devices in the silence of
the tomb. There all our prospects end, and we are no
longer sensible to pain, to persecution, to insult, and to
agony. But Charles, thus departed, wandering on the face
of the globe, without protector, adviser or resource, no lapse
of years can put a close upon my anxiety for him! If I
am in ease and prosperity, I cannot relish them, for my
exposed and living son may be at that moment in the depth
of misery! If I am myself oppressed and suffering, the
thought of what may be his fate will form a dreadful addition
to all my other calamities! What am I to say of
him upon my return to Constance? If he had died, this
was a natural casualty; and, whatever grief it might occasion,
time no doubt would mollify and abate it. But what
account can now be rendered of him to his disconsolate
mother and terrified sisters? How can I lift up my head in
their presence, or meet the glance of their reproachful eyes!
The idea had occurred to me, in the instant of Charles’s
departure, and immediately after his exit, of detaining or
bringing him back by force. He was by his extreme youth,
according to the maxims of the world, still in a state of
guardianship, and unqualified to be the chooser of his own
actions. But to this mode of proceeding, however deeply
I felt the catastrophe which had taken place, I could never
consent. It was in utter hostility to the lessons of chivalry
and honour, with which I had been familiarised from my
earliest infancy. There might be cases, in which this restraint
laid by a father upon his child would be salutary.
But the idea which had occasioned the secession of Charles,
was decisive in this instance. What right had I to chain
him to dishonour? The whole bent of his education had
been, to impress him with the feelings by which he was[198]
now actuated. If I detained him for a short time, was
there any vigilance on earth that could finally prevent him
from executing a purpose upon which his whole soul was
resolved? Or, suppose there were, must not the consequence
be to break his spirit, to deprive him of all manliness and
energy, and to render him the mere drooping and soulless
shadow of that conspicuous hero I had been anxious to
make him? It might be said indeed, that this was the determination
of a boy, formed in an hour, and that, if I
detained him only long enough for deliberation and revisal,
he would of his own accord retract so desperate a project.
But I felt that it was a resolution formed to endure, and
was built upon principles that could not change so long as
an atom of his mind remained. No; I was rather disposed
to say, however grievous was the wound he inflicted on me,
Go, my son! Act upon the dictates of your choice, as I
have acted on mine! I admire your resolution, though I
cannot imitate it. Your purpose is lofty and godlike; and
he that harbours it, was not born to be a slave. Be free;
and may every power propitious to generosity and virtue
smooth your path through life, and smile upon your desires!
The anguish I felt for having lost my son, and in this
painful and reproachful manner, was not diminished to me
either by society or amusement. I dared not go out of my
house. I saw no one but my own attendants. I had not
the courage to meet the aspect of a human creature. I
knew not how far persons in Dresden might have heard the
injurious reports which occasioned the flight of my son, or
even have been acquainted with the nature of that flight.
I had promised to see Coligny again; but, alas! the affair
which had at first led me to wish to see him, was now at
an end. I had no heart to seek him; nor indeed did I
know what story I was to tell him, or how I was to remove
the suspicions he had urged against me. The machine of
human life, though constituted of a thousand parts, is in
all its parts regularly and systematically connected; nor is
it easy to insert an additional member, the spuriousness of
which an accurate observation will not readily detect. How
was I to assign a source of my wealth different from the
true, which would not be liable to investigation, and, when[199]
investigated, would not be seen to be counterfeit? This
indeed is the prime source of individual security in human
affairs, that whatever any man does, may be subjected to
examination, and whatever does not admit of being satisfactorily
accounted for, exposes him whom it concerns to
the most injurious suspicions. This law of our nature, so
salutary in its general operation, was the first source of all
my misfortunes.
I began now seriously to consider what judgment I was
to pass upon the bequests of the stranger. Were they to
be regarded as a benefit or a misfortune? Ought they to
be classed with the poisoned robe of Nessus, which, being
sent as a token of affection, was found, in the experiment,
to eat into the flesh and burn up the vitals of him that
wore it? Should I from this instant reject their use, and,
returning to the modes of life established among my fellow
men, content myself with the affection of those with whom
I had intercourse, though poverty and hardships mingled
with the balm?
The experiment I had made of these extraordinary gifts
was a short one; but how contrary were all the results I had
arrived at, from those I looked for? When the stranger had
appeared six months before at the cottage of the lake, he
had found me a poor man indeed, but rich in the confidence,
and happy in the security and content, of every
member of my family. I lived in the bosom of nature,
surrounded with the luxuriance of its gifts and the sublimity
of its features, which the romantic elevation of my
soul particularly fitted me to relish. In my domestic scene
I beheld the golden age renewed, the simplicity of pastoral
life without its grossness, a situation remote from cities and
courts, from traffic and hypocrisy, yet not unadorned with
taste, imagination, and knowledge. Never was a family
more united in sentiments and affection. Now all this
beauteous scene was defaced! All was silence, suspicion,
and reserve. The one party dared not be ingenuous, and
the other felt that all the paradise of attachment was dwindled
to an empty name. No questions were asked; for no
honest answer was given or expected. Though corporeally
we might sit in the same apartment, in mind a gulf, wide,[200]
impassable, and tremendous, gaped between us. My wife
pined in speechless grief, and, it was to be feared, had sustained
a mortal blow. My son, my only son, a youth of
such promise that I would not have exchanged him for empires,
had disappeared, and, as he had solemnly protested,
for ever. My heart was childless: my bosom was bereaved
of its dearest hope. It was for him principally that I had
accepted, that I had rejoiced in the gifts of the stranger.
My darling vision was to see him clothed in the harness,
surrounded with the insignia, of a hero. There was nothing
I so earnestly desired as that his merits, graced with the
favours of fortune, might cause him to stand confessed the
first subject of France; a situation more enviable than that
of its monarch, since he who holds it is raised by deeds, and
the other only by birth; and if less respected by interested
courtiers, is certain to be more honoured by the impartial
voice of history. But, if I felt thus desolate and heartbroken
for the loss of my son, what would be the sentiments
of his mother, more susceptible to feel, and, in her present
weakness of spirits, less vigorous to bear, than myself, when
the dreadful tidings should be communicated to her?
Yet I could not resolve to renounce donations which I
had so dearly appropriated. I held it to be a base and cowardly
to surrender gifts so invaluable, upon so insufficient
an experiment. He, I thought, must be a man of ignoble
and grovelling spirit, who could easily be prevailed on to part
with unbounded wealth and immortal life. I had but just
entered the vast field that was opened to me. It was of the
nature of all great undertakings to be attended with difficulties
and obstacles in the commencement, to present a
face calculated to discourage the man that is infirm of purpose.
But it became my descent, my character and pretensions,
to show myself serene in the midst of storms.
Perseverance and constancy are the virtues of a man.
Affairs of this extensive compass often prove in the issue
the reverse of what they seemed in the outset. The tempest
might be expected to disperse, difficulties to unravel
themselves, and unlooked-for concurrences to arise. All
opposition and hostile appearance give way before him who
goes calmly onward, and scorns to be dismayed.

[201]
</div></body></text></TEI>
