<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
CHAPTER IV.
I had been now two years in habits of life and a mode of
expense extremely injurious to my patrimony, when a circumstance
occurred, which promised completely to deliver
me from the ruinous consequences of my own folly. This
was no other than my encounter with that incomparable
woman, who afterwards became the partner of my life, and
the mother of my children. I cannot even now recollect
her without tears: the sentiment which her very name excites
in my mind is a mingled feeling, on the one hand, of
the most exquisite and unspeakable delight, a feeling that
elevates and expands and electrifies my throbbing heart;
and, on the other, of the bitterest anguish and regret. I
must develope the source of this feeling.
Marguerite Louise Isabeau de Damville was, at the period
of our first meeting, in the nineteenth year of her age.
Her complexion was of the most perfect transparency, her
eyes black and sparkling, and her eyebrows dark and long.
Such were the perfect smoothness and clearness of her skin,
that at nineteen she appeared five years younger than she was,
and she long retained this extreme juvenility of form. Her step
was airy and light as that of a young fawn, yet at the same
time firm, and indicative of strength of body and vigour of
mind. Her voice, like the whole of her external appearance,
was expressive of undesigning, I had almost said
childish, simplicity. Yet, with all this playfulness of appearance,[34]
her understanding was bold and correct. Her
mind was well furnished with every thing that could add
to her accomplishments as a wife or a mother. Her indulgent
parents had procured her every advantage of education,
and circumstances had been uncommonly favourable
to her improvement. She was encouraged and assisted in
the art of drawing, for which she discovered a very early
talent, by Leonardo da Vinci; and she formed her poetical
taste from the conversation and instructions of Clement
Marot. But, amidst the singular assemblage of her intellectual
accomplishments, there was nothing by which she
was so much distinguished, as the uncommon prudence of
her judgments, and the unalterable amiableness of her
manners. This was the woman destined to crown my happiness,
and consummate my misery. If I had never
known her, I should never have tasted true pleasure; if I
had been guided by her counsels, I should not have drained
to the very dregs the cup of anguish.
The house of her father, the Marquis de Damville, was
the resort of all the most eminent wits and scholars of that
period, particularly of Marot, Rabelais, Erasmus and Scaliger.
This was my first inducement to frequent it. My
education had inspired me with an inextinguishable love of
literature; and the dissipation in which I was at this time
involved could not entirely interrupt the propensity. The
most thoughtless and extravagant period of my life had occasional
intervals of study and reflection; and the gay,
animated, and ingenious conversation of the men I have
mentioned, had always peculiar charms for me.
I had continued for some time to visit at the Marquis’s
hotel, before I encountered the beautiful Marguerite. The
first time I saw her, she made a deep impression upon me.
The Marquis, who was one of the most benevolent and
enlightened of mankind, had been led by my character and
manners to conceive a warm friendship for me. He saw
the ruin in which I was heedlessly involving myself, and
believed that it was not yet too late to save me. As he
thought that there was no method so likely to effect my
reformation as the interposition of domestic affections, he
was not unwilling to encourage the attachment I began to[35]
feel for his daughter. On my part I wanted but little
encouragement. I no sooner observed her manners, and
became acquainted with her merits, than my heart was unalterably
fixed. I became as it were a new man. I was
like one, who, after his eyes had grown imperceptibly dim
till at length every object appeared indistinct and of a
gloomy general hue, has his sight instantaneously restored,
and beholds the fabric of the universe in its genuine clearness,
brilliancy, and truth. I was astonished at my own
folly, that I could so long have found gratification in pleasures
mean and sensual. I was ashamed of my own degradation.
I could not endure the comparison between the
showy, unsubstantial attractions of the women I had hitherto
frequented, and the charms of the adorable Marguerite. The
purity of her mind seemed to give a celestial brilliancy and
softness to the beauties of her person. The gross and brutal
pursuits of the debauchee are often indeed described by the
same epithets as the virtuous and refined passion with which
I was now for the first time inspired; but experience convinced
me that they differed in their most essential features.
The Marquis saw the state of my mind, and addressed
me thus. “Count,” said he, “I feel the most ardent
friendship for you. I am inexpressibly concerned for your
welfare. You will be convinced of this, when I have furnished
you with a clue to my late conduct towards you. I
regard you, if not as a ruined man, at least as a man in the
high road to ruin. Your present habits are of the most
dangerous sort; they appear to you perfectly conformable
to principles of the strictest honour; nay, they come recommended
to you by a certain éclat and dignity with
which they seem to be surrounded. I could say to you,
Recollect yourself. Be not misled by delusive appearances.
Consider the present state of your fortune, and the state in
which your mother left it. You cannot be ignorant how
greatly it is impaired. How has this circumstance arisen?
Have your revenues been expended in the service of your
country? Have you purchased any thing by them that will
confer on you lasting renown? Put together the sum of
actions, which, piece by piece, you have been willing to
regard as indifferent and innocent, if not as graceful and[36]
becoming. You cannot but be struck with their monstrous
deformity. Is it possible that you can be ignorant of the
nature of poverty? There is such a thing as honourable
poverty. The poverty of Cincinnatus was honourable, who
impoverished himself by paying the fine which was factiously
imposed on his son, and then was contented to pass
his time alternately between the highest situations and the
most rigid simplicity. The poverty of a man of genius,
such as Rabelais, if not honourable, is interesting, when we
compare his merits and worth with that of many of those
persons upon whom fortune has blindly lavished her favours.
It is honourable, if he have declined the means of
enriching himself by the sacrifice of his independence and
his principles. But of all earthly things the most contemptible
is the man who, having wasted his goods in
riotous living, yet hungers after the luxuries that have
proved his bane, and feasts himself upon the steam of
dainties of which he has lost the substance. Poverty,
always sufficiently disadvantageous in a degenerate age,
where attention and courtship are doled forth with scales
of gold, is tremendous to him. He is the scorn of all mankind.
Wherever he is a guest, he is invited only to be
trampled upon and insulted. He is capable of nothing,
and is a burden to society and mankind. The helplessness
of age advances upon him with stealing steps, and he
is destined to gather all its miseries and none of its consolations.
“I might have talked to you thus, but I refused it. I
apprehend something of the nature of advice. I know that
it can seldom be attended with its genuine effect, and will
never be received with deference and pleasure, where its
motives are capable of misconstruction. If I had talked to
you thus, I might have appeared to be indulging the tyranny
of age; I might have seemed to assume an unbecoming
air of superiority and command: it could not have
been clear that I was honestly interested in that, about
which I affected so much concern. I doubt not the ingenuousness
of your nature. I doubt not that you would
have been struck with the picture. But I must be permitted
to doubt the adequate and lasting effect of my expostulation.[37]
I was not willing by my forwardness and
loquacity to wear out one of the great springs of human
improvement.
“I have determined on your reform. For that purpose I
think it necessary to combine my remonstrances and advice,
with a change of your habits and situation. You have
tasted largely of what are commonly called the pleasures of
life, but there are pleasures that you have not tasted. At
this moment you anticipate them; and anticipate them
with the ardour of a lover. But you know not yet all the
gratifications that attend upon domestic affections.
“I am willing to bestow upon you my daughter. I consent
to prove the purity of my advice, and the sincerity of
my regard, by committing her happiness to the risk. She
is a treasure, the equal of which perhaps the world does not
hold. I speak not of her personal attractions. But in understanding,
accomplishments, and virtue, I firmly believe
no woman living can compare with her. In possessing her,
you will be blessed beyond the lot of princes. But, at the
same time that I shall thus put happiness within your grasp,
remember that I commit to your disposal the happiness of
Marguerite. You are a worthy and an honourable man;
your talents and your virtues will constitute her felicity.
Her portion will redeem the injury which your patrimony
has suffered from your excesses, and you will have enough
for yourselves, and for your mutual offspring. I cannot
believe that, with such a deposit intrusted to you, you will
consent to bring her to misery and ruin.
“I have one condition, however, to stipulate with you.
I require of you, as the pledge of her happiness, that you
break off your present modes of life; that you separate
yourself from your connections, and retire into the country
upon your paternal estate. You are yet too young to be in
danger from that tyranny of custom, which often renders
men more advanced in life incapable of relishing the simple
and genuine pleasures. You will find contentment and
joy in the society of my daughter, and in the bosom of
your rising family. You will be happy in the circle of
your own hearth, and have little to ask of the rest of mankind.
If, in any ill-omened and inauspicious moment, the[38]
allurements of your present vices (forgive the plainness of
my speech) should resume their power over you, I hope at
least that I shall never live to see it; that I shall not be
taught by bitter experience, that I have sacrificed to the
disinterestedness of my friendship the happiness of my
daughter and of my posterity!”
My heart weeps blood, while I record the admonitions of
this noble and generous man. A nobler France did not
contain through all her boundaries. Refined by literature,
polished by the best society his age could afford, grown
grey in the field of honour, and particularly distinguished
by the personal attachment and confidence of his sovereign.
What was all this advice to me? What return did I make
to this unparalleled kindness and friendship? I ruined this
admirable woman! I involved her in poverty and shame!
With the most savage barbarity I prepared for her an immature
grave! Can I forget this? Of what avail to me are
immortal life and immortal youth? Oh, Marguerite, Marguerite!
For ever thy image haunts me! For ever thy
ghost upbraids me! How little have I proved myself worthy
of such a partner! Rather what punishment, what plagues,
what shame and detestation have I not deserved! Praised
be Heaven, the last prayer of the Marquis of Damville at
least was granted! He did not live to witness my relapse,
my profligacy, and insanity.
I resume the thread of my story.—I listened to the address
of the Marquis with reverence and admiration. I
accepted his conditions with joy. I married his adorable
daughter, and conducted her to my paternal estate in the
Bourdelois. Now only it was that I tasted of perfect happiness.
To judge from my own experience in this situation,
I should say, that nature has atoned for all the disasters
and miseries she so copiously and incessantly pours upon
her sons, by this one gift, the transcendent enjoyment and
nameless delights which, wherever the heart is pure and
the soul is refined, wait on the attachment of two persons
of opposite sexes. My beloved Marguerite guided and
directed me, at the same time that she was ever studying
my gratification. I instructed her by my experience, while
she enlightened me by the rectitude and decision of her[39]
taste. Ours was a sober and dignified happiness, and its
very sobriety served to give it additional voluptuousness.
We had each our separate pursuits, whether for the cultivation
of our minds, or the promotion of our mutual interests.
Separation gave us respectability in each other’s
eyes, while it prepared us to enter with fresh ardour into
society and conversation. In company with each other,
hours passed over us, and appeared but minutes. It has
been said to be a peculiar felicity for any one to be praised
by a man who is himself eminently a subject of praise:
how much happier to be prized and loved by a person
worthy of love? A man may be prized and valued by his
friend; but in how different a style of sentiment from the
regard and attachment that may reign in the bosom of his
mistress or his wife? Self-complacency and self-satisfaction
may perhaps be numbered among the principal sources of
contentment. It is necessary for him who would endure
existence with patience, that he should conceive himself to
be something,—that he should be persuaded he is not a
cipher in the muster-roll of man. How bitter is the anguish
we are sometimes doomed to sustain in this respect
from the marks we receive of other men’s indifference and
contempt? To feel that we are loved by one whose love we
have deserved, to be employed in the mutual interchange of
the marks of this love, habitually to study the happiness
of one by whom our happiness is studied in return, this is
the most desirable, as it is the genuine and unadulterated
condition of human nature. I must have some one to
sympathise with; I cannot bear to be cut off from all relations:
I desire to experience a confidence, a concord, an
attachment, that cannot rise between common acquaintance.
In every state we long for some fond bosom on which to
rest our weary head; some speaking eye with which to exchange
the glances of intelligence and affection. Then the
soul warms and expands itself; then it shuns the observation
of every other beholder; then it melts with feelings
that are inexpressible, but that the heart understands without
the aid of words; then the eyes swim with rapture;
then the frame languishes with enjoyment; then the soul
burns with fire; then the two persons thus blest are no[40]
longer two; distance vanishes, one thought animates, one
mind informs them. Thus love acts; thus it is ripened
to perfection; never does man feel himself so much alive,
so truly etherial, as when, bursting the bonds of diffidence,
uncertainty and reserve, he pours himself entire into the
bosom of the woman he adores.
Marguerite de Damville was particularly distinguished
from every other woman I ever knew by the justness of her
taste and the vividness of her feelings. This circumstance
was a fund of inexhaustible delight and improvement to
me. We were both of us well acquainted with the most
eminent poets and fine writers of modern times. But when
we came to read them together, they presented themselves
in a point of view in which they had never been seen by us
before. It is, perhaps, more important that poetry, and
every thing that excites the imagination or appeals to the
heart, should be read in solitude, than in society. But the
true way to understand our author in these cases, is to employ
each of these modes in succession. The terrible, the
majestic, the voluptuous and the melting, are all of them,
in a considerable degree, affairs of sympathy; and we never
judge of them so infallibly, or with so much satisfaction,
as when, in the presence of each other, the emotion is
kindled in either bosom at the same instant, the eye-beams,
pregnant with sentiment and meaning, involuntarily meet
and mingle; the voice of the reader becomes modulated by
the ideas of his author, and that of the hearer, by an accidental
interjection of momentary comment or applause,
confesses its accord. It was in this manner that we read
together the admirable sonnets of Petrarch, and passed in
review the sublime effusions of Dante. The letters of
Eloisa to Abelard afforded us singular delight. We searched
into the effusions of the Troubadours, and, among all their
absurdities and inequality, we found a wildness, a daring
pouring forth of the soul, an unpruned richness of imagination,
and, from time to time, a grandeur of conception and
audacious eccentricity of thought, that filled us with unlooked
for transport. At other times, when not regularly
engaged in this species of reading, we would repeat passages
to each other, communicate the discoveries of this sort that[41]
either had made in solitude, and point out unobserved beauties,
that perhaps neither of us would have remarked, but
for the suggestions of the other. It is impossible for two
persons to be constituted so much alike, but that one of
them should have a more genuine and instantaneous relish
for one sort of excellence, and another for another. Thus
we added to each other’s stores, and acquired a largeness of
conception and liberality of judgment that neither of us
would have arrived at if separate. It is difficult to imagine
how prolific this kind of amusement proved of true happiness.
We were mutually delighted to remark the accord
of our feelings, and still more so, as we perceived that
accord to be hourly increasing, and what struck either as a
blemish in the other, wearing out and disappearing. We
were also led by the same means to advert to the powers of
mind existing in each, the rectitude of judgment and delicacy
of feeling. As our attachment hourly increased, we
rejoiced in this reciprocation of benefits, while each gave or
received something that added to value of mind and worth
of character. Mutual esteem was incessantly kept alive,
and mutual esteem is the only substantial basis of love.
Each of us hourly blessed our common lot, while each believed
it impracticable elsewhere to have found so much
worth blended with so much sweetness.
But we did not confine ourselves to the library and fireside.
We walked, we rode, we travelled together; we observed
together the beauties of nature, and the system of
the universe; we traversed many provinces of France, and
some parts of Italy and Spain; we examined the characters of
mankind, as they are modified by the varieties of natural
descent, or the diversities of political government. In all
this we found peculiar gratification. There is something
in the scent and impression of a balmy atmosphere, in the
lustre of sunshine, in the azure heaven and the purple
clouds, in the opening of prospects on this side and on that,
in the contemplation of verdure and fertility, and industry
and simplicity and cheerfulness, in all their variations, in
the very act and exercise of travelling, peculiarly congenial
to the human frame. It expands the heart, it makes the
spirit dance, and exquisitely disposes us for social enjoyment.[42]
The mind becomes more elevated and refined, it
assumes a microscopical and unwonted sensibility; it feels
things which, in ordinary moments, are unheeded and unknown;
it enjoys things too evanescent for a name, and too
minute to be arrested; it trembles with pleasure through
every fibre and every articulation.
One thing is necessary to be mentioned in this place,
though, while it adds to the fidelity of delineation, I am
aware it breaks the tone of feeling, and the harmony of
the picture. But it is not my intention in this history to
pass myself for better than I am. I have laid down to myself
the sacred maxim of absolute truth and impartiality. I
must confess, therefore, with whatever anguish, my extreme
inferiority to my incomparable partner. She had all the
simplicity of genuine taste. The more she delivered herself
up to nature, the greater was her content. All superfluous
appendages and show appeared to her as so many
obstacles to enjoyment. She derived her happiness from
the tone of her own mind, and stood in no need of the gaping
admiration and stupid wonder of others to make her
feel herself happy. But I retained the original vice of my
mind. The gestures of worship and the voice of applause
were necessary to me. I did not suffice to myself. I was not
satisfied with the tranquil and inglorious fruition of genuine
pleasures, forgetting the vain and anxious tumult of the
world, and forgotten by those who figured on its theatre.
It may be, that Marguerite could, and ought, by insensible
degrees, to have rooted out this disease of my mind. But
I am concerned only with the statement of facts; and I
know that no such thing was the effect of our intercourse.
This absurd passion did not, however, at this time, lead
me to any fatal extremities. It contented itself with the
frivolous gratification resulting from a certain portion of
ostentation and expense. I maintained a considerable train
of servants: my apartments were magnificent, and my furniture
splendid. When we travelled, it was with an attendance
little short of princely. Idiot that I was, to
regard this as an addition to the genuine pleasures which I
have above enumerated! When we were at home, every
accidental guest was received and entertained with extraordinary[43]
pomp, a pomp not directed to add to his accommodation,
but that was designed to leave him impressed
with astonishment and admiration at the spirit of his host.
Often, indeed, did I feel this ostentation an encumbrance:
often did I languish for the ease and freedom which result
from a mediocrity of circumstances. But this I called,
doing honour to my ancestors and my country, and vindicating
the consideration due to the house of St. Leon.
To quit this painful recollection.—A circumstance which
tended at this time to fill the measure of my happiness,
consisted in the dear pledges which Marguerite bore me of
our mutual affection. It is impossible for him who has not
experienced it, to conceive the accumulation which a genuine
tenderness derives from this source. The difficulties
are many that attend upon pregnancy; trifles are at that
period sources of fatigue and injury; it is necessary that
the person should be protected, and the mind tranquil. We
love to watch over a delicate plant, that appears to call for
all our anxiety and attention. There is in this case the
sentiment, without the repulsive circumstances that attends
upon our sympathy with a dangerous and alarming disease.
Marguerite, by her sensibility and growing attachment,
abundantly rewarded my cares. At length the critical period
arrives, when an event so extraordinary occurs, as cannot
fail to put the human frame in considerable jeopardy.
Never shall I forget the interview between us immediately
subsequent to her first parturition, the effusion of soul with
which we met each other after all danger seemed to have
subsided, the kindness which animated us, increased as it
was by ideas of peril and suffering, the sacred sensation
with which the mother presented her infant to her husband,
or the complacency with which we read in each other’s eyes
a common sentiment of melting tenderness and inviolable
attachment!
This, she seemed to say, is the joint result of our common
affection. It partakes equally of both, and is the
shrine in which our sympathies and our life have been
poured together, never to be separated. Let other lovers
testify their engagements by presents and tokens; we record
and stamp our attachment in this precious creature, a[44]
creature of that species which is more admirable than any
thing else the world has to boast, a creature susceptible of
pleasure and pain, of affection and love, of sentiment and
fancy, of wisdom and virtue. This creature will daily
stand in need of an aid we shall delight to afford; will require
our meditations and exertions to forward its improvement,
and confirm its merits and its worth. We shall
each blend our exertions, for that purpose, and our union,
confirmed by this common object of our labour and affection,
will every day become more sacred and indissoluble.—All
this the present weakness of my beloved Marguerite would
not allow her to say. But all this occurred to my reflections;
and, when we had time tranquilly to compare
our recollection of the event, it plainly appeared that in all
this our hearts and conceptions had most truly sympathised.
The possessing a third object, a common centre of anxiety
to both, is far from weakening the regard of such a couple
for each other. It does not separate or divert them; it is
a new link of connection. Each is attached to it the more
for the sake of either; each regards it as a sort of branch
or scion, representing the parent; each rejoices in its
health, its good humour, its smiles, its increase in size, in
strength, and in faculties, principally from the idea of the
gratification they will communicate to the other. Were it
not for this idea, were it possible the pleasure should not
be mutual, the sentiment would be stripped of its principal
elevation and refinement; it would be comparatively cold,
selfish, solitary, and inane.
In the first ten years of our marriage my wife brought
me five children, two sons and three daughters. The second
son only died in his infancy. My predominant passion at
this time was that of domestic pleasures and employments,
and I devoted myself, jointly with the mother, to the cultivation
of the minds of my children. They all in a considerable
degree rewarded our care; they were all amiable.
Taught by the example of their parents, they lived in uncommon
harmony and affection. Charles, the eldest, was
a lad of a bold and active disposition; but the sentiments
of virtue and honour that were infused into him, both by
Marguerite and myself, found a favourable reception, and[45]
promised to render those qualities, which, if left to themselves,
might have been turbulent and dangerous, productive
of the happiest consequences. Julia, his eldest sister, was
uncommonly mild and affectionate, alive to the slightest
variations of treatment, profoundly depressed by every
mark of unkindness, but exquisitely sensible to demonstrations
of sympathy and attachment. She appeared little
formed to struggle with the difficulties of life and the frowns
of the world; but, in periods of quietness and tranquillity
nothing could exceed the sweetness of her character and
the fascination of her manners. Her chief attachment was
to her mother, though she was by no means capable of her
mother’s active beneficence and heroic fortitude. Louisa,
the second daughter, resembled her mother in person, and
promised to resemble her in character. Marguerite, the
youngest, differed from the whole family, in the playfulness
and frolic of her disposition. Her vivacity was inexhaustible,
and was continually displaying itself in innocent
tricks, and smart, unexpected sallies. Nothing could possibly
be more ingenuous than this admirable infant; nothing
more kind, considerate, and enthusiastic in her tenderness
and grief, when an occasion occurred to call forth
these sentiments. But the moment the sorrowful occasion
was over, she would resume all her vivacity; and even
sometimes, in the midst of her tears, some trait of her
native humour would escape. I know not whether all the
family were not more attached to the little Marguerite than
to any other individual member, as she certainly oftenest
contributed to their amusement and pleasure.—Such was
the amiable circle, one and all of whom have been involved
by me in the most tremendous ruin and disgrace.
</div></body></text></TEI>
