<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="44">
CHAPTER XLIV.
My son related to me his history, and made me the depository
of his feelings and reflections. The name of St.
Leon indeed never passed his lips; I felt that he had consigned
that to inviolable oblivion. The appellation he bore
in the army was the chevalier de Damville. Soon after he
abandoned me at Dresden, he had entered as a volunteer
in the imperial army. Charles the Fifth was at that time
assembling forces to encounter the confederates of the
league of Smalcalde. In this situation my son was eminently
fortunate. He was distinguished for uncommon
enterprise and courage in some of the first actions of the
war, and early attracted the notice of Gian-Battista Castaldo,
count of Piadena, who held an eminent command
under the emperor. In this army my son was a party to[440]
the decisive battle of Muhlberg, in April, 1547. Four years
afterwards, Castaldo was appointed commander in chief
against the Turks in Hungary, and the French chevalier
accompanied his patron to this new scene of military enterprise.
Charles had felt dissatisfied with the grounds and
motives of war between the Catholics and Protestants of
Germany, men worshipping the same Saviour, and appealing
to the same authorities, but many of them at least,
from the most upright and ingenuous scruples, differing in
their interpretation of those authorities. But, in their contentions
between the crescent and the cross, he entered
with unbounded enthusiasm into all the feelings that constitute
a champion or a martyr. He conceived that whatever
was dear to the human race in this world or the next
hung on the issue; he regarded the grandeur of the cause
as purifying his efforts and consecrating his name; and,
when he lifted his sword in vindication of an expiring
God, he felt himself steeled with more than mortal energy.
My son dwelt on the merits of his patron with a degree
of veneration and love that knew no bounds. Castaldo
was ranked by the consenting voice of mankind with the
most accomplished generals of the age in which he lived. “I
knew him,” said Charles, “in his most private hours, and
stood next to and observed him in the greatest and most
critical occasions of his life. It was the least of his merits
that he distinguished me, that he took me up friendless and
an orphan, that under every circumstance he was more
than a father to me; that he corrected my faults, that he
guided me with his advice, that he instructed me with his
wisdom, and supported me by his countenance. Castaldo
was the most persevering and indefatigable of mankind; no
difficulties could undermine his apparent serenity; no accumulation
of dangers could appal or perplex him. Victory
never robbed him of his caution; misfortune and
defeat never destroyed the grandeur and elasticity of his
soul. I firmly believe that no general had ever a more discouraging
variety of counteractions to struggle with. The
enemy was barbarous and sanguinary, yet firm and undismayed,
in the full vigour of their political health, under
the rule of the ablest of their sovereigns. The nobles of[441]
the country Castaldo had to defend had almost all of them
been alienated, one after another, by the tricking and ill-judged
politics of the house of Austria. The nation was
ruined, houseless and starving. Many of the officers who
served under my general were the basest of poltroons; but
they were imposed upon him by his court; he was compelled
to place them in important trusts; and, even when
in the most dastardly way they betrayed those trusts, they
were by some pitiful intrigue sheltered from his discipline
and his justice. The forces of Castaldo were mutinous
and ungovernable; and he was almost constantly denied
the funds requisite for their pay.
“For two years the count of Piadena struggled with these
complicated difficulties. When he had obtained a hard-earned
advantage at one extremity of the kingdom, he
found it rendered useless by some treachery or incapacity
in the other extremity, which it was instantly necessary he
should hasten to repair. He quelled four alarming mutinies
by his firmness, his resources, and the prudent combination
of his calmness and severity. In the midst of one of his
most arduous situations he suddenly received intelligence
that the states of Hungary, which were at that time assembled,
were debating whether they should enter into a treaty
with Solyman for the purpose of placing their country
under the Turkish sceptre. He immediately flew to the
place of council; the decision in favour of Solyman was
drawn up and ready to be adopted; but Castaldo, by his
presence, his authority, and his eloquence, recalled the
states to their duty, and prevented them from eternally
staining the Christian name. Surrounded with these difficulties,
opposed to an enemy many times more numerous
than the forces he could bring against them, and whose
wants were all plentifully supplied, Castaldo by his single
abilities kept the balance even, or rather caused it to incline
in favour of the Christian scale. But what,” added Charles,
“avails the most consummate merit! How may the most
incessant and undaunted exertions be shadowed by the veil
of obscurity! The world judges by events; success is
necessary to procure the palm of fame. After two years
of such labours as I witnessed and glory to describe, a mutiny[442]
broke out among the mercenary troops, more formidable
than any that preceded; it was no longer even in the
abilities of Castaldo to quell. ‘We honour and respect you,’
said the mutineers, ‘but we will no more serve without
pay: we have been baffled two years; we will march to the
gates of Vienna, and demand from Ferdinand, our sovereign,
why we are thus denied the arrears that are due to
us.’ They chose leaders for this expedition among themselves.
The great Castaldo, whose peculiar talent it is to
accommodate himself to events, and never by any misfortune
to be deprived of his invention and resources, saw
what it was that became him. Having in vain tried every
method for retaining his troops in Hungary, he offered
himself to lead them to Vienna. Then was seen the true
ascendancy of a noble mind. Goaded with want and distress,
they had been deaf to the remonstrances of their
general when he sought to direct them against the enemy.
But, when they saw him submitting himself to their rage
and impatience, and fearlessly intrusting his safety to
those who had before refused even to listen to him, and
who had reason to fear his retribution as their accuser and
judge, they were awed and speechless. They almost repented
of their frenzy, and were half determined to return
to their duty. Their remorse indeed was imperfect and
ineffectual; but Castaldo led this band of mutineers
through the heart of the kingdom, with as many symptoms
of regularity, modesty, and order, as if they had been
the best paid, the promptest and most loyal army in the
world.”
My son spoke in terms of the warmest enthusiasm of
the defence of Erlau, in the period of Castaldo’s last and
most arduous campaign against the Turks. In respect of
fortifications the town was scarcely competent to resist the
feeblest enemy; but its deficiency in this point was supplied
by the constancy and valour of its garrison and inhabitants.
The very women displayed an enterprise, that
the more vigorous sex have seldom exhibited. In one instance,
a heroine of this sort was seen fighting in the presence
of her mother and her husband. Her husband fell
dead by her side. “Let us, my daughter,” said the mother,[443]
“remove the body, and devote the rest of our care to
its honourable funeral.”—“May God,” returned the impassioned
widow, “never suffer the earth to cover my husband’s
corse, till his death has been amply revenged; this
is the hour of battle, not a time for funeral and for tears!”
So speaking, and seizing the sword and shield of the
breathless champion, she rushed upon the enemy; nor did
she quit the breach till, by the slaughter of three Turks
who were ascending the scaling ladders, she had appeased
the fury in her breast, and the ghost of her departed husband.
Then raising the corpse, and pressing it to her
bosom, she drew it to the great church of the city, and
paid to it the last honours with all possible magnificence.[9]
Many other examples of a heroism not inferior to this
were displayed on the same occasion. “And shall I,”
added Charles, in a sally of glorious enthusiasm, “ever
desert a cause which has been thus honoured? Shall I
betray a soil which has been immortalised by such illustrious
actions? Shall I join myself to the renegado Bethlem
Gabor, and the execrable Chatillon? No: such virtue
as I have described never could have been conceived,
but in the bosom of truth! Great as is the pious devotion
I feel for that God who died on the cross for the salvation
of mankind, I own my weakness, if it be a weakness, his
cause is scarcely less endeared to me by the sublime exertions
of his heroic followers, than by his own adorable
condescension and mercy.
“When the glorious Castaldo departed with his rebellious
army for the metropolis of Germany, there was nothing I
more earnestly desired than to accompany his march. For
seven years he had conferred on me the benefits, and shown
towards me the affection, of a father; and I could not think
of being separated from him without the extremest anguish.
Beside, I regarded it as little less than sacrilege, to quit his
side at a time that he was exposed to the furious suggestions
of a host of robbers and banditti. But he would not allow
me to abandon my post. ‘Some time,’ said he, ‘we must[444]
separate, and you must stand alone. I have been long
enough your instructor; and, if my lessons or my example
can produce improvement in you, they must have performed
that office already.’ He treated with disdain the thought
of the danger to which he might be exposed, and his need
of a faithful guard; a thought which he had detected in the
midst of my anxieties, but which I had not the courage to
mention. ‘This,’ said he, ‘is your genuine sphere. You
are a young man, burning with the zeal of truth and religion.
You are inspired with the enthusiasm of a champion
and a martyr. Heaven knows how willingly I would have
spent my blood for the overthrow of Mahomet and his
blasphemous impieties. To me this is not permitted; to
you it is. I shall be engaged in the painful scenes of civil
contention between Christian and Christian, misguided and
inflamed by the human inventions of Luther and of Calvin.
You have before you a clearer and a brighter field; and, I
confidently persuade myself, you will be found worthy of
your happier destiny.’—The count of Piadena bestowed
me, so he was pleased to express himself, upon Nadasti,
the great palatine of the realm, as the most precious pledge
of his friendship that it was in his power to confer.
“Since the retreat of Castaldo, the Christian standard has
obtained little more either of attention or aid from our
lawful sovereign, now the possessor of the imperial throne.
Ferdinand for a great part of this time has had his negotiators
at Constantinople, whom the insulting Turk has
condescended neither sincerely to treat with, nor to dismiss.
The Christian army in Hungary has been left to its own
resources; but zeal has supplied the place of magazines,
and religious ardour has taught us to omit no occasion of
annoying and distressing the enemy. The most considerable
occurrence of this period, has been the siege of Ziget about
four years ago. Solyman, taking advantage of certain factious
broils among our hereditary nobility, appointed at that
time one of his eunuchs bashaw of Buda; and, having
placed a numerous army under his command,
dismissed him from the foot of his throne with this arrogant
injunction, not to enter the capital of his province, till he
had first sent the keys of Ziget as an offering to his royal[445]
master. Horvati, the Christian governor of this fortification,
is one of the most accomplished and the bravest of
our native commanders; and, Nadasti having sent him a
reinforcement the better to enable him to support the
threatened siege, I was in the number of the soldiers appointed
on this service. The trenches were opened early
in June, and the siege continued for the space of seven
weeks. The bashaw, though an eunuch, in person stunted,
and of monstrous deformity, was distinguished for an uncommon
degree of audacity and perseverance. Four times
he filled the dikes of the fortification with wood and earth;
and as often, by means of a furious sally of the besieged,
the materials, which had thus with vast expense of industry
and labour been accumulated, were set fire to and consumed.
On the twelfth day of the siege he gained possession
of the town, and drove us back into the citadel;
but on the day following we recovered the ground we had
lost, and from that time the town was his no more. The
actions of these days were the severest of the whole siege;
we fought the enemy street by street, and inch by inch;
the great fountain in the market-place ran with blood; we
ascended hills of the dead, which the infidels opposed as a
barrier to our further progress; I seized two Turkish
standards; and, though wounded, pursued the enemy
through the eastern gate, and returned in triumph. Nadasti
in the sixth week of the siege marched to our relief;
but he was met and worsted by the bashaw, who returned
victorious to the foot of the walls. During the whole of
the siege mutual animosity was cherished by every species
of contrivance, and the heads of the distinguished dead
were exhibited on both sides as spectacles of abhorrence
and terror. The inflamed passions of the combatants several
times found a vent in listed duels: Horvati, the
governor, killed in one of these encounters a gigantic Turk,
who had sent a proud defiance to our host. I procured
myself honour upon a similar occasion; and the scarf
which I now wear, composed the turban of the infidel I
slew. At length the disappointed bashaw was obliged to
raise the siege; and he soon after died of grief and mortification
in his palace at Buda. I confess I recollect the[446]
Christian exploits in the defence of Ziget, in which I also
had a share, with rapture and delight; they will serve to
awaken in me new animation, when hereafter the coldness
of ordinary life might strike palsy to my soul. I shall
never think I have lived in vain, after having contributed,
in however humble a place, to arrest the career of insolence
and impiety which, under the standard of the crescent,
threatened to over-run the whole Christian world.”
Such were the adventures and such the sentiments of the
gallant chevalier de Damville. I had been a warrior in my
youth, and the discourse he held was sufficiently congenial
to my earliest propensities. I saw indeed that he had
gained, in the zeal of a soldier of the cross, a source of martial
heroism, to which my military history had been a
stranger. But, though I could not entirely enter into this
sentiment of his, and indeed regarded it as an infatuation
and delusion, I did not the less admire the grandeur of soul
with which this heroic fable inspired him. There was no
present propensity in my heart that led me to delight in
deeds of blood and war; I saw them in their genuine colours
without varnish or disguise; I hated and loathed
them from my very inmost soul; but, notwithstanding this,
I was sensible to the lustre which military zeal cast round
the character of my son. Nor is this incredible or absurd;
the qualities of a generous and enterprising champion are
truly admirable, though the direction they have received
should be worthy of eternal regret.
Charles de Damville was my friend; and, when I say
this, I cannot help stopping a moment for the indulgence
of reflecting on the contrast between my present intercourse
with my son, and my late connection with Bethlem Gabor.
I had sought the friendship of the Hungarian partisan,
partly because I wanted a protector and an ally, but partly
also because in my soul I looked up to and admired the
man. I called Bethlem Gabor my friend; I persuaded
myself that I had cogent reasons for calling him so. But
there was little sympathy between us; he was wrapped up
in his own contemplations; he was withered by his own
calamities; our souls scarcely touched in a single point.
No, no; this is not friendship.
[447]
Friendship is a necessity of our nature, the stimulating
and restless want of every susceptible heart. How wretched
an imposture in this point of view does human life for the
most part appear! With boyish eyes, full of sanguine
spirits and hope, we look round us for a friend; we sink
into the grave, broken down with years and infirmities, and
still have not found the object of our search. We talk to
one man, and he does not understand us; we address ourselves
to another, and we find him the unreal similitude
only of what we believed him to be. We ally ourselves to
a man of intellect and of worth; upon further experience
we cannot deny him either of these qualities; but the more
we know each other, the less we find of resemblance; he
is cold, where we are warm; he is harsh, where we are
melted into the tenderest sympathy; what fills us with rapture,
is regarded by him with indifference; we finish with
a distant respect, where we looked for a commingling soul:
this is not friendship. We know of other men, we have
viewed their countenances, we have occasionally sat in their
society: we believe it is impossible we should not find in
them the object we sought. But disparity of situation and
dissimilitude of connections prove as effectual a barrier to
intimacy, as if we were inhabitants of different planets.
It is one of the most striking characteristics of the nature
of man, that we are eternally apt to grow dead and insensible
to the thing we have not. Half our faculties become
palsied, before we are in the slightest degree aware that we
are not what we were, and what we might be. There are
philosophers who regard this as the peculiar privilege of
man, a wise provision of Providence to render us contented
and easy with our lot in existence. For my part,
I do not envy, and I have never aspired to, the happiness
of ignorance and stupidity. But, be it a blessing or a
curse, the phenomenon is undoubted. Present me with some
inestimable benefit, that my nature fitted me to enjoy, but
that my fortune has long denied me to partake, and I instantly
rise as from an oppressive lethargy. Before, it may
be, I felt myself uneasy; but I knew of no remedy, I
dreamed it was my nature, I did not put forth a finger for
relief. But now, that I have drawn the unexpected prize,[448]
I grow astonished at my former blindness; I become suddenly
sensible of my powers and my worth; the blood that
slept in my heart, circulates, and distends every vein; I
tread on air; I feel a calm, yet ravishing delight; I know
what kind of an endowment life is, to a being in whom
sentiment and affection are awakened to their genuine
action.
This was the effect of the mutual attachment produced
between me and Charles. I looked into him, and saw a
man; I saw expansive powers of intellect and true sensibility
of heart. To be esteemed and loved and protected by
such a man; to have him to take one by the hand, to enquire
into one’s sorrows, to interest himself in one’s anxieties, to
exult in one’s good fortune and one’s joys; this and this
only deserves the name of existence.
I had however a painful drawback upon my satisfaction.
It was my fate since the visit of the stranger of the lake of
Constance, to rejoice for moments and to lament for years.
I could not at first ascend to that purity and eminence of
friendship to forget myself; I could not but painfully feel
the contrast between me and my son. How happy was
Charles, how respectable, how self-approving, how cheerful
of heart: I shall presently have occasion to speak of a still
further addition to his happiness! I looked indeed young,
fair, blooming, a stranger to care: but I had a secret worm
gnawing at my vitals. This very deceitfulness of my countenance
was a bitter aggravation to my remorse. I never
saw my features reflected in the polished shield without
feeling myself struck to the core. Charles had walked
right onward in the paths of honour; he feared no detection;
he had no secret consciousness that gave the lie to the voice
of applause, partiality, and friendship. But I was all a lie;
I was no youth; I was no man; I was no member of the
great community of my species. The past and the future
were equally a burthen to my thoughts. To the eye that
saw me I was a youth flushed with hope, and panting for
existence. In my soul I knew, and I only knew, that I was
a worn out veteran, battered with the storms of life, having
tried every thing and rejected every thing, and discarded
for ever by hope and joy. When I walked forth leaning[449]
on the arm of him who delighted to call me his younger
brother, this was the consciousness that hunted my steps
and blasted me with its aspect whichever way we turned.
</div></body></text></TEI>
