<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Chemical History of a Candle</title><author>Michael Faraday</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1848</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="lecture" n="2">LECTURE II.
A CANDLE: BRIGHTNESS OF THE FLAME—AIR NECESSARY FOR
COMBUSTION—PRODUCTION OF WATER.
We were occupied the last time we met in considering the general character
and arrangement as regards the fluid portion of a candle, and the way in
which that fluid got into the place of combustion. You see, when we have a
candle burning fairly in a regular, steady atmosphere, it will have a
shape something like the one shewn in the diagram, and will look pretty
uniform, although very curious in its character. And now, I have to ask
your attention to the means by which we are enabled to ascertain what
happens in any particular part of the flame—why it happens, what it does
in happening, and where, after all, the whole candle goes to: because, as
you know very well, a candle being brought before us and burned,
disappears, if burned properly, without the least trace of dirt in the
candlestick—and this is a very curious circumstance. In order, then, to
examine this candle carefully, I have arranged certain apparatus, the use
of which you will see as I go on. Here is a candle: I am about to put the
end of this glass tube into the middle of the flame—into that part which
old Hooke has represented in the diagram as being rather dark, and which
you can see at any time, if you will look at a candle carefully, without
blowing it about. We will examine this dark part first.
[Illustration: Fig. 7.]
Now, I take this bent glass tube, and introduce one end into that part of
the flame, and you see at once that something is coming from the flame,
out at the other end of the tube; and if I put a flask there, and leave it
for a little while, you will see that something from the middle part of
the flame is gradually drawn out, and goes through the tube and into that
flask, and there behaves very differently from what it does in the open
air. It not only escapes from the end of the tube, but falls down to the
bottom of the flask like a heavy substance, as indeed it is. We find that
this is the wax of the candle made into a vaporous fluid—not a gas. (You
must learn the difference between a gas and a vapour: a gas remains
permanent, a vapour is something that will condense.) If you blow out a
candle, you perceive a very nasty smell, resulting from the condensation
of this vapour. That is very different from what you have outside the
flame; and, in order to make that more clear to you, I am about to produce
and set fire to a larger portion of this vapour—for what we have in the
small way in a candle, to understand thoroughly, we must, as philosophers,
produce in a larger way, if needful, that we may examine the different
parts. And now Mr. Anderson will give me a source of heat, and I am about
to shew you what that vapour is. Here is some wax in a glass flask, and I
am going to make it hot, as the inside of that candle-flame is hot, and
the matter about the wick is hot. [The Lecturer placed some wax in a glass
flask, and heated it over a lamp.] Now, I dare say that is hot enough for
me. You see that the wax I put in it has become fluid, and there is a
little smoke coming from it. We shall very soon have the vapour rising up.
I will make it still hotter, and now we get more of it, so that I can
actually pour the vapour out of the flask into that basin, and set it on
fire there. This, then, is exactly the same kind of vapour as we have in
the middle of the candle; and that you may be sure this is the case, let
us try whether we have not got here, in this flask, a real combustible
vapour out of the middle of the candle. [Taking the flask into which the
tube from the candle proceeded, and introducing a lighted taper.] See how
it burns. Now, this is the vapour from the middle of the candle, produced
by its own heat; and that is one of the first things you have to consider
with respect to the progress of the wax in the course of its combustion,
and as regards the changes it undergoes. I will arrange another tube
carefully in the flame, and I should not wonder if we were able, by a
little care, to get that vapour to pass through the tube to the other
extremity, where we will light it, and obtain absolutely the flame of the
candle at a place distant from it.  Now, look at that. Is not that a very
pretty experiment? Talk about laying on gas—why, we can actually lay on a
candle! And you see from this that there are clearly two different kinds
of action—one the production of the vapour, and the other the
combustion of it—both of which take place in particular parts of the
candle.
[Illustration: Fig. 8]
I shall get no vapour from that part which is already burnt. If I raise
the tube (fig. 7) to the upper part of the flame, so soon as the vapour
has been swept out, what comes away will be no longer combustible: It is
already burned. How burned? Why, burned thus:—In the middle of the flame,
where the wick is, there is this combustible vapour; on the outside of the
flame is the air which we shall find necessary for the burning of the
candle; between the two, intense chemical action takes place, whereby the
air and the fuel act upon each other, and at the very same time that we
obtain light the vapour inside is destroyed. If you examine where the heat
of a candle is, you will find it very curiously arranged. Suppose I take
this candle, and hold a piece of paper close upon the flame, where is the
heat of that flame? Do you not see that it is not in the inside? It is
in a ring, exactly in the place where I told you the chemical action was;
and even in my irregular mode of making the experiment, if there is not
too much disturbance, there will always be a ring. This is a good
experiment for you to make at home. Take a strip of paper, have the air in
the room quiet, and put the piece of paper right across the middle of the
flame (I must not talk while I make the experiment), and you will find
that it is burnt in two places, and that it is not burnt, or very little
so, in the middle; and when you have tried the experiment once or twice,
so as to make it nicely, you will be very interested to see where the heat
is, and to find that it is where the air and the fuel come together.
This is most important for us as we proceed with our subject. Air is
absolutely necessary for combustion; and, what is more, I must have you
understand that fresh air is necessary, or else we should be imperfect
in our reasoning and our experiments. Here is a jar of air. I place it
over a candle, and it burns very nicely in it at first, shewing that what
I have said about it is true; but there will soon be a change. See how the
flame is drawing upwards, presently fading, and at last going out. And
going out, why? Not because it wants air merely, for the jar is as full
now as it was before; but it wants pure, fresh air. The jar is full of
air, partly changed, partly not changed; but it does not contain
sufficient of the fresh air which is necessary for the combustion of a
candle. These are all points which we, as young chemists, have to gather
up; and if we look a little more closely into this kind of action, we
shall find certain steps of reasoning extremely interesting. For instance,
here is the oil-lamp I shewed you—an excellent lamp for our
experiments—the old Argand lamp. I now make it like a candle [obstructing
the passage of air into the centre of the flame]; there is the cotton;
there is the oil rising up it; and there is the conical flame. It burns
poorly, because there is a partial restraint of air. I have allowed no air
to get to it, save round the outside of the flame, and it does not burn
well. I cannot admit more air from the outside, because the wick is large;
but if, as Argand did so cleverly, I open a passage to the middle of the
flame, and so let air come in there, you will see how much more
beautifully it burns. If I shut the air off, look how it smokes; and why?
We have now some very interesting points to study. We have the case of the
combustion of a candle; we have the case of a candle being put out by the
want of air; and we have now the case of imperfect combustion; and this is
to us so interesting, that I want you to understand it as thoroughly as
you do the case of a candle burning in its best possible manner. I will
now make a great flame, because we need the largest possible
illustrations. Here is a larger wick [burning turpentine on a ball of
cotton]. All these things are the same as candles, after all. If we have
larger wicks, we must have a larger supply of air, or we shall have less
perfect combustion. Look now at this black substance going up into the
atmosphere; there is a regular stream of it. I have provided means to
carry off the imperfectly burned part, lest it should annoy you. Look at
the soots that fly off from the flame: see what an imperfect combustion it
is, because it cannot get enough air. What, then, is happening? Why,
certain things which are necessary to the combustion of a candle are
absent, and very bad results are accordingly produced; but we see what
happens to a candle when it is burnt in a pure and proper state of air. At
the time when I shewed you this charring by the ring of flame on the one
side of the paper, I might have also shewn you, by turning to the other
side, that the burning of a candle produces the same kind of
soot—charcoal or carbon.
But, before I shew that, let me explain to you—as it is quite necessary
for our purpose—that, though I take a candle and give you, as the general
result, its combustion in the form of a flame, we must see whether
combustion is always in this condition, or whether there are other
conditions of flame; and we shall soon discover that there are, and that
they are most important to us. I think, perhaps, the best illustration of
such a point to us, as juveniles, is to shew the result of strong
contrast. Here is a little gunpowder. You know that gunpowder burns with
flame—we may fairly call it flame. It contains carbon and other
materials, which altogether cause it to burn with a flame. And here is
some pulverised iron, or iron filings. Now, I purpose burning these two
things together. I have a little mortar in which I will mix them. (Before
I go into these experiments, let me hope that none of you, by trying to
repeat them, for fun’s sake, will do any harm. These things may all be
very properly used if you take care; but without that, much mischief will
be done.) Well, then, here is a little gunpowder, which I put at the
bottom of that little wooden vessel, and mix the iron filings up with it,
my object being to make the gunpowder set fire to the filings and burn
them in the air, and thereby shew the difference between substances
burning with flame and not with flame. Here is the mixture; and when I set
fire to it, you must watch the combustion, and you will see that it is of
two kinds. You will see the gunpowder burning with a flame, and the
filings thrown up. You will see them burning too, but without the
production of flame.  They will each burn separately. [The Lecturer then
ignited the mixture.] There is the gunpowder, which burns with a flame;
and there are the filings—they burn with a different kind of combustion.
You see, then, these two great distinctions; and upon these differences
depend all the utility and all the beauty of flame which we use for the
purpose of giving out light. When we use oil, or gas, or candle, for the
purpose of illumination, their fitness all depends upon these different
kinds of combustion.
There are such curious conditions of flame, that it requires some
cleverness and nicety of discrimination to distinguish the kinds of
combustion one from another. For instance, here is a powder which is very
combustible, consisting, as you see, of separate little particles. It is
called lycopodium[7], and each of these particles can produce a vapour,
and produce its own flame; but, to see them burning, you would imagine it
was all one flame. I will now set fire to a quantity, and you will see the
effect. We saw a cloud of flame, apparently in one body; but that rushing
noise [referring to the sound produced by the burning] was a proof that
the combustion was not a continuous or regular one. This is the lightning
of the pantomimes, and a very good imitation. [The experiment was twice
repeated by blowing lycopodium from a glass tube through a spirit-flame.]
This is not an example of combustion like that of the filings I have been
speaking of, to which we must now return.
Suppose I take a candle, and examine that part of it which appears
brightest to our eyes. Why, there I get these black particles, which
already you have seen many times evolved from the flame, and which I am
now about to evolve in a different way. I will take this candle and clear
away the gutterage, which occurs by reason of the currents of air; and if
I now arrange a glass tube so as just to dip into this luminous part, as
in our first experiment, only higher, you see the result. In place of
having the same white vapour that you had before, you will now have a
black vapour. There it goes, as black as ink. It is certainly very
different from the white vapour; and when we put a light to it, we shall
find that it does not burn, but that it puts the light out. Well, these
particles, as I said before, are just the smoke of the candle; and this
brings to mind that old employment which Dean Swift recommended to
servants for their amusement, namely, writing on the ceiling of a room
with a candle. But what is that black substance? Why, it is the same
carbon which exists in the candle. How comes it out of the candle? It
evidently existed in the candle, or else we should not have had it here.
And now I want you to follow me in this explanation. You would hardly
think that all those substances which fly about London, in the form of
soots and blacks, are the very beauty and life of the flame, and which are
burned in it as those iron filings were burned here. Here is a piece of
wire gauze, which will not let the flame go through it; and I think you
will see, almost immediately, that when I bring it low enough to touch
that part of the flame which is otherwise so bright, that it quells and
quenches it at once, and allows a volume of smoke to rise up.
I want you now to follow me in this point,—that whenever a substance
burns, as the iron filings burnt in the flame of gunpowder, without
assuming the vaporous state (whether it becomes liquid or remains solid),
it becomes exceedingly luminous. I have here taken three or four examples
apart from the candle, on purpose to illustrate this point to you; because
what I have to say is applicable to all substances, whether they burn or
whether they do not burn,—that they are exceedingly bright if they retain
their solid state, and that it is to this presence of solid particles in
the candle-flame that it owes its brilliancy.
Here is a platinum-wire, a body which does not change by heat. If I heat
it in this flame, see how exceedingly luminous it becomes. I will make the
flame dim, for the purpose of giving a little light only, and yet you will
see that the heat which it can give to that platinum-wire, though far less
than the heat it has itself, is able to raise the platinum-wire to a far
higher state of effulgence. This flame has carbon in it; but I will take
one that has no carbon in it. There is a material, a kind of fuel—a
vapour, or gas, whichever you like to call it—in that vessel, and it has
no solid particles in it; so I take that because it is an example of flame
itself burning without any solid matter whatever; and if I now put this
solid substance in it, you see what an intense heat it has, and how
brightly it causes the solid body to glow. This is the pipe through which
we convey this particular gas, which we call hydrogen, and which you shall
know all about next time we meet. And here is a substance called oxygen,
by means of which this hydrogen can burn; and although we produce, by
their mixture, far greater heat[8] than you can obtain from the candle,
yet there is very little light. If, however, I take a solid substance, and
put that into it, we produce an intense light If I take a piece of lime, a
substance which will not burn, and which will not vaporise by the heat
(and because it does not vaporise, remains solid, and remains heated), you
will soon observe what happens as to its glowing. I have here a most
intense heat, produced by the burning of hydrogen in contact with the
oxygen; but there is as yet very little light—not for want of heat, but
for want of particles which can retain their solid state; but when I hold
this piece of lime in the flame of the hydrogen as it burns in the oxygen,
see how it glows! This is the glorious lime-light, which rivals the
voltaic-light, and which is almost equal to sunlight. I have here a piece
of carbon or charcoal, which will burn and give us light exactly in the
same manner as if it were burnt as part of a candle. The heat that is in
the flame of a candle decomposes the vapour of the wax, and sets free the
carbon particles—they rise up heated and glowing as this now glows, and
then enter into the air. But the particles when burnt never pass off from
a candle in the form of carbon. They go off into the air as a perfectly
invisible substance, about which we shall know hereafter.
Is it not beautiful to think that such a process is going on, and that
such a dirty thing as charcoal can become so incandescent? You see it
comes to this—that all bright flames contain these solid particles; all
things that burn and produce solid particles, either during the time they
are burning, as in the candle, or immediately after being burnt, as in the
case of the gunpowder and iron-filings,—all these things give us this
glorious and beautiful light.
I will give you a few illustrations. Here is a piece of phosphorus, which
burns with a bright flame. Very well; we may now conclude that phosphorus
will produce, either at the moment that it is burning or afterwards, these
solid particles. Here is the phosphorus lighted, and I cover it over with
this glass for the purpose of keeping in what is produced. What is all
that smoke? That smoke consists of those very particles which are produced
by the combustion of the phosphorus. Here, again, are two substances. This
is chlorate of potassa, and this other sulphuret of antimony. I shall mix
these together a little, and then they may be burnt in many ways. I shall
touch them with a drop of sulphuric acid, for the purpose of giving you an
illustration of chemical action, and they will instantly burn[9]. [The
Lecturer then ignited the mixture by means of sulphuric acid.] Now, from
the appearance of things, you can judge for yourselves whether they
produce solid matter in burning. I have given you the train of reasoning
which will enable you to say whether they do or do not; for what is this
bright flame but the solid particles passing off?
[Illustration: Fig. 9.]
Mr. Anderson has in the furnace a very hot crucible,—I am about to throw
into it some zinc filings, and they will burn with a flame like gunpowder.
I make this experiment because you can make it well at home. Now, I want
you to see what will be the result of the combustion of this zinc. Here it
is burning—burning beautifully like a candle, I may say. But what is all
that smoke, and what are those little clouds of wool which will come to
you if you cannot come to them, and make themselves sensible to you in the
form of the old philosophic wool, as it was called? We shall have left in
that crucible, also, a quantity of this woolly matter. But I will take a
piece of this same zinc and make an experiment a little more closely at
home, as it were. You will have here the same thing happening. Here is the
piece of zinc, there [pointing to a jet of hydrogen] is the furnace, and
we will set to work and try and burn the metal. It glows, you see: there
is the combustion, and there is the white substance into which it burns.
And so, if I take that flame of hydrogen as the representative of a
candle, and shew you a substance like zinc burning in the flame, you will
see that it was merely during the action of combustion that this substance
glowed—while it was kept hot; and if I take a flame of hydrogen, and put
this white substance from the zinc into it, look how beautifully it glows,
and just because it is a solid substance.
I will now take such a flame as I had a moment since, and set free from it
the particles of carbon. Here is some camphine, which will burn with a
smoke; but if I send these particles of smoke through this pipe into the
hydrogen flame, you will see they will burn and become luminous, because
we heat them a second time. There they are. Those are the particles of
carbon re-ignited a second time. They are those particles which you can
easily see by holding a piece of paper behind them, and which, whilst they
are in the flame, are ignited by the heat produced, and, when so ignited,
produce this brightness. When the particles are not separated, you get no
brightness. The flame of coal-gas owes its brightness to the separation,
during combustion, of these particles of carbon, which are equally in that
as in a candle. I can very quickly alter that arrangement. Here, for
instance, is a bright flame of gas. Supposing I add so much air to the
flame as to cause it all to burn before those particles are set free, I
shall not have this brightness; and I can do that in this way:—If I place
over the jet this wire-gauze cap, as you see, and then light the gas over
it, it burns with a non-luminous flame, owing to its having plenty of air
mixed with it before it burns; and if I raise the gauze, you see it does
not burn below[10]. There is plenty of carbon in the gas; but, because the
atmosphere can get to it, and mix with it before it burns, you see how
pale and blue the flame is. And if I blow upon a bright gas-flame, so as
to consume all this carbon before it gets heated to the glowing point, it
will also burn blue: [The Lecturer illustrated his remarks by blowing on
the gas-light.] The only reason why I have not the same bright light when
I thus blow upon the flame is, that the carbon meets with sufficient air
to burn it before it gets separated in the flame in a free state. The
difference is solely due to the solid particles not being separated before
the gas is burnt.
You observe that there are certain products as the result of the
combustion of a candle, and that of these products one portion may be
considered as charcoal, or soot; that charcoal, when afterwards burnt,
produces some other product; and it concerns us very much now to ascertain
what that other product is. We shewed that something was going away; and I
want you now to understand how much is going up into the air; and for that
purpose we will have combustion on a little larger scale. From that candle
ascends heated air, and two or three experiments will shew you the
ascending current; but, in order to give you a notion of the quantity of
matter which ascends in this way, I will make an experiment by which I
shall try to imprison some of the products of this combustion. For this
purpose I have here what boys call a fire-balloon. I use this fire-balloon
merely as a sort of measure of the result of the combustion we are
considering; and I am about to make a flame in such an easy and simple
manner as shall best serve my present purpose. This plate shall be the
“cup,” we will so say, of the candle; this spirit shall be our fuel; and I
am about to place this chimney over it, because it is better for me to do
so than to let things proceed at random.
[Illustration: Fig. 10.]
Mr. Anderson will now light the fuel, and here at the top we shall get the
results of the combustion. What we get at the top of that tube is exactly
the same, generally speaking, as you get from the combustion of a candle;
but we do not get a luminous flame here, because we use a substance which
is feeble in carbon. I am about to put this balloon—not into action,
because that is not my object—but to shew you the effect which results
from the action of those products which arise from the candle, as they
arise here from the furnace. [The balloon was held over the chimney, when
it immediately commenced to fill.] You see how it is disposed to ascend;
but we must not let it up, because it might come in contact with those
upper gas-lights, and that would be very inconvenient. [The upper
gas-lights were turned out, at the request of the Lecturer, and the
balloon was allowed to ascend.] Does not that shew you what a large bulk
of matter is being evolved? Now, there is going through this tube [placing
a large glass tube over a candle] all the products of that candle, and you
will presently see that the tube will become quite opaque. Suppose I take
another candle, and place it under a jar, and then put a light on the
other side, just to shew you what is going on. You see that the sides of
the jar become cloudy, and the light begins to burn feebly. It is the
products, you see, which make the light so dim, and this is the same thing
which makes the sides of the jar so opaque. If you go home and take a
spoon that has been in the cold air, and hold it over a candle—not so as
to soot it—you will find that it becomes dim, just as that jar is dim. If
you can get a silver dish, or something of that kind, you will make the
experiment still better. And now, just to carry your thoughts forward to
the time we shall next meet, let me tell you that it is water which
causes the dimness; and when we next meet. I will shew you that we can
make it, without difficulty, assume the form of a liquid.</div></body></text></TEI>