<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>The Chemical History of a Candle</title><author>Michael Faraday</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher></publisher><pubPlace></pubPlace><date>1848</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="lecture" n="7">LECTURE ON PLATINUM.
[Delivered before the ROYAL INSTITUTION, on Friday, February 22,
1861.]
Whether I was to have the honour of appearing before you this evening or
not, seemed to be doubtful upon one or two points. One of these I will
mention immediately; the other may or may not appear during the course of
the hour that follows. The first point is this. When I was tempted to
promise this subject for your attention this evening, it was founded upon
a promise, and a full intent of performing that promise, on the part of my
friend Deville, of Paris, to come here to shew before you a phenomenon in
metallurgic chemistry not common. In that I have been disappointed. His
intention was to have fused here some thirty or forty pounds of platinum,
and so to have made manifest, through my mouth and my statement, the
principles of a new process in metallurgy, in relation to this beautiful,
magnificent, and valuable metal; but circumstances over which neither he
nor I, nor others concerned, have sufficient control, have prevented the
fulfilment of that intention; and the period at which I learned the fact
was so recent, that I could hardly leave my place here to be filled by
another, or permit you, who in your kindness have come to hear what might
be said, to remain unreceived in the best manner possible to me under the
circumstances. I therefore propose to state, as well as I can, what the
principles are on which M. Deville proceeds, by means of drawings, and
some subordinate or inferior experiments. The metal platinum, of which you
see some very fine specimens on the table, has been known to us about a
hundred years. It has been wrought in a beautiful way in this country, in
France, and elsewhere, and supplied to the consumer in ingots of this
kind, or in plates, such as we have here, or in masses, that by their very
fall upon the table indicate the great weight of the substance, which is,
indeed, nearly at the head of all substances in that respect. This
substance has been given to us hitherto mainly through the philosophy of
Dr. Wollaston, whom many of us know, and it is obtained in great purity
and beauty. It is a very remarkable metal in many points, besides its
known special uses. It usually comes to us in grains. Here is a very fine
specimen of native platinum in grains. Here is also a nugget or ingot, and
here are some small pieces gathered out of certain alluvial soils in
Brazil, Mexico, California, and the Uralian districts of Russia.
It is strange that this metal is almost always found associated with some
four or five other metals, most curious in their qualities and
characteristics. They are called platiniferous metals; and they have not
only the relation of being always found associated in this manner, but
they have other relations of a curious nature, which I shall point out to
you by a reference to one of the tables behind me. This substance is
always native—it is always in the metallic state; and the metals with
which it is found connected, and which are rarely found elsewhere, are
palladium, rhodium, iridium, osmium, and ruthenium. We have the names in
one of the tables arranged in two columns, representing, as you see, two
groups—platinum, iridium, and osmium constituting one group; and
ruthenium, rhodium, and palladium the other. Three of these have the
chemical equivalent of 98½, and the others a chemical equivalent of
about half that number. Then the metals of one group have an extreme
specific gravity—platinum being, in fact, the lightest of the three, or
as light as the lightest. Osmium has a specific gravity of 21.4, and is
the heaviest body in nature; platinum is 21.15, and iridium the same; the
specific gravity of the other three being only about half that, namely,
11.3, 12.1, and 11.8. Then there is this curious relation, that palladium
and iridium are very much alike, so that you would scarcely know one from
the other, though one has only half the weight of the other, and only half
the equivalent power. So with iridium and rhodium, and osmium and
ruthenium, which are so closely allied that they make pairs, being
separated each from its own group. Then these metals are the most
infusible that we possess. Osmium is the most difficult to fuse: indeed, I
believe it never has been fused, while every other metal has. Ruthenium
comes next, iridium next, rhodium next, platinum next (so that it ranks
here as a pretty fusible metal, and yet we have been long accustomed to
speak of the infusibility of platinum), and next comes palladium, which is
the most fusible metal of the whole. It is a curious thing to see this
fine association of physical properties coming out in metals which are
grouped together somehow or other in nature, but, no doubt, by causes
which are related to analogous properties in their situation on the
surface of the earth, for it is in alluvial soils that these things are
found.
Now, with regard to this substance, let me tell you briefly how we get it.
The process used to be this. The ore which I shewed you just now was
taken, and digested in nitro-muriatic acid of a certain strength, and
partly converted into a solution, with the leaving behind of certain
bodies that I have upon the table.  The platinum being dissolved with care
in acids, to the solution the muriate of ammonia was added, as I am about
to add it here. A yellow precipitate was then thrown down, as you perceive
is the case now; and this, carefully washed and cleansed, gave us that
body [pointing to a specimen of the chloride of platinum and ammonium],
the other elements, or nearly all, being ejected.  This substance being
heated, gave us what we call platinum sponge, or platinum in the metallic
state, so finely divided as to form a kind of heavy mass or sponge, which,
at the time that Dr. Wollaston first sent it forth, was not fusible for
the market or in the manufacturers’ workshops, inasmuch as the temperature
required was so high, and there were no furnaces that could bring the mass
into a globule, and cause the parts to adhere together. Most of our metals
that we obtain from nature, and work in our shops, are brought at last
into a mass by fusion.  I am not aware that there is in the arts or
sciences any other than iron which is not so.  Soft iron we do not bring
together by fusion, but by a process which is analogous to the one that
was followed in the case of platinum, namely, welding; for these divided
grains of spongy platinum having been well washed and sunk in water for
the purpose of excluding air, and pressed together, and heated, and
hammered, and pressed again, until they come into a pretty close, dense,
compact mass, did so cohere, that when the mass was put into the furnace
of charcoal, and raised to a high temperature, the particles, at first
infinitely divided—for they were chemically divided—adhered the one to
the other, each to all the rest, until they made that kind of substance
which you see here, which will bear rolling and expansion of every kind.
No other process than that has hitherto been adopted for the purpose of
obtaining this substance from the particles by solution, precipitation,
ignition, and welding. It certainly is a very fine thing to see that we
may so fully depend upon the properties of the various substances we have
to deal with; that we can, by carrying out our processes, obtain a
material like this, allowing of division and extension under a rolling
mill—a material of the finest possible kind, the parts being held
together, not with interstices, not with porosity, but so continuous that
no fluids can pass between them; and, as Dr. Wollaston beautifully shewed,
a globule of platinum fused by the voltaic battery and the oxyhydrogen
blowpipe, when drawn into a wire, was not sounder or stronger than this
wire made by the curious coalescence of the particles by the sticking
power that they had at high temperatures. This is the process adopted by
Messrs. Johnson and Matthey, to whose great kindness I am indebted for
these ingots and for the valuable assistance I have received in the
illustrations.
The treatment, however, that I have to bring before you is of another
kind; and it is in the hope that we shall be able before long to have such
a thing as the manufacture of platinum of this kind, that I am encouraged
to come before you, and tell you how far Deville has gone in the matter,
and to give you illustrations of the principles on which he proceeds. I
think it is but fair that you should see an experiment shewing you the way
in which we get the adhesion of platinum. Probably you all know of the
welding of iron: you go into the smith’s shop, and you see him put the
handle of a poker on to the stem, and by a little management and the
application of heat he makes them one.  You have no doubt seen him put the
iron into the fire and sprinkle a little sand upon it.  He does not know
the philosophy he calls into play when he sprinkles a little sand over the
oxide of iron, but he has a fine philosophy there, or practises it, when
he gets his welding. I can shew you here this beautiful circumstance of
the sticking together of the particles up to the fullest possible
intensity of their combination. If you were to go into the workshops of
Mr. Matthey, and see them hammering and welding away, you would see the
value of the experiment I am about to shew you. I have here some
platinum-wire.  This is a metal which resists the action of acids, resists
oxidation by heat, and change of any sort; and which, therefore, I may
heat in the atmosphere without any flux. I bend the wire so as to make the
ends cross: these I make hot by means of the blowpipe, and then, by giving
them a tap with a hammer, I shall make them into one piece. Now that the
pieces are united, I shall have great difficulty in pulling them apart,
though they are joined only at the point where the two cylindrical
surfaces came together. And now I have succeeded in pulling the wire
apart, the division is not at the point of welding, but where the force of
the pincers has cut it, so that the junction we have effected is a
complete one. This, then, is the principle of the manufacture and
production of platinum in the old way.
The treatment which Deville proposes to carry out, and which he has
carried out to a rather large extent in reference to the Russian supply of
platinum, is one altogether by heat, having little or no reference to the
use of acids. That you may know what the problem is, look at this table,
which gives you the composition of such a piece of platinum ore as I
shewed you just now. Wherever it comes from, the composition is as
complicated, though the proportions vary:—
Platinum, . . . . . 76.4

Iridium,. . . . . .  4.3

Rhodium,. . . . . .  0.3

Palladium,. . . . .  1.4

Gold, . . . . . . .  0.4

Copper, . . . . . .  4.1

Iron, . . . . . . . 11.7

Osmide of Iridium,.  0.5

Sand, . . . . . . .  1.4

                   —————

                   100.5

This refers to the Uralian ore. In that state of combination, as shewn in
the table, the iridium and osmium are found combined in crystals,
sometimes to the amount of 0.5 per cent., and sometimes 3 or 4 per cent.
Now, this Deville proposes to deal with in the dry way, in the place of
dealing with it by any acid.
I have here another kind of platinum; and I shew it to you for this
reason. The Russian Government, having large stores of platinum in their
dominions, have obtained it in a metallic state, and worked it into coin.
The coin I have in my hand is a twelve silver rouble piece. The rouble is
worth three shillings, and this coin is, therefore, of the value of
thirty-six shillings. The smaller coin is worth half that sum; and the
other, half of that. The metal, however, is unfit for coinage. When you
have the two metals, gold and silver, used for coinage, you have a little
confusion in the value of the two in the market; but when you have three
precious metals (for you may call platinum a precious metal) worked into
coin, they will be sure to run counter to one another. Indeed, the case
did happen, that the price of platinum coin fixed by the Government was
such, that it was worth while to purchase platinum in other countries, and
make coin of it, and then take it into that country and circulate it. The
result was, that the Russian Government stopped the issue. The composition
of this coin is—platinum, 97.0; iridium, 1.2; rhodium, 0.5; palladium,
0.25; a little copper, and a little iron. It is, in fact, bad platinum: it
scales, and it has an unfitness for commercial use and in the laboratory,
which the other well-purified platinum has not. It wants working over
again.
Now, Deville’s process depends upon three points,—upon intense heat,
blowpipe action, and the volatility of certain metals. We know that there
are plenty of metals that are volatile; but this, I think, is the first
time that it has been proposed to use the volatility of certain
metals—such as gold and palladium—for the purpose of driving them off
and leaving something else behind. He counts largely upon the volatility
of metals which we have not been in the habit of considering volatile, but
which we have rather looked upon as fixed; and I must endeavour to
illustrate these three points by a few experiments. Perhaps I can best
show you what is required in the process of heating platinum by using that
source of heat which we have here, and which seems to be almost
illimitable—namely, the voltaic battery; for it is only in consequence of
the heat that the voltaic battery affects the platinum. By applying the
two extremities of the battery to this piece of platinum-wire, you will
see what result we shall obtain. You perceive that we can take about this
heating agent wherever we like, and deal with it as we please, limiting it
in any way. I am obliged to deal carefully with it; but even that
circumstance will have an interest for you in watching the experiment.
Contact is now made. The electric current, when compressed into thin
conducting-wires offering resistance, evolves heat to a large extent; and
this is the power by which we work. You see the intense glow immediately
imparted to the wire; and if I applied the heat continuously, the effect
of the current would be to melt the wire. As soon as the contact is
broken, the wire resumes its former appearance; and now that we make
contact again, you perceive the glow as before. [The experiment was
repeated several times in rapid succession.] You can see a line of light,
though you can scarcely perceive the wire; and now that it has melted with
the great heat, if you examine it, you will perceive that it is indeed a
set of irregularities from end to end—a set of little spheres, which are
strung upon an axis of platinum running through it. It is that wire which
Mr. Grove described as being produced at the moment when fusion of the
whole mass is commencing. In the same manner, if I take a tolerably thick
piece of platinum, and subject it to the heat that can be produced by this
battery, you will see the brilliancy of the effect produced. I shall put
on a pair of spectacles for the experiment, as there is an injurious
effect of the voltaic spark upon the eyes, if the action is continued; and
it is neither policy nor bravery to subject any organ to unnecessary
danger; and I want, at all events, to keep the full use of my eyes to the
end of the lecture.
You now see the action of the heat upon the piece of platinum—heat so
great as to break in pieces the plate on which the drops of metal fall.
You perceive, then, that we have sufficiently powerful sources of heat in
nature to deal with platinum. I have here an apparatus by which the same
thing can be shewn. Here is a piece of platinum, which is put into a
crucible of carbon made at the end of one pole of the battery, and you
will see the brilliant light that will be produced. There is our furnace,
and the platinum is rapidly getting heated; and now you perceive that it
is melted, and throwing off little particles. What a magnificent
philosophical instrument this is. When you look at the result, which is
lying upon the charcoal, you will see a beautifully fused piece of
platinum. It is now a fiery globule, with a surface so bright, and smooth,
and reflecting, that I cannot tell whether it is transparent, or opaque,
or what. This, then, will give you an idea of what has to be done by any
process that pretends to deal with thirty, or forty, or fifty pounds of
platinum at once.
Let me now tell you briefly what Deville proposes to do. First of all, he
takes this ore, with its impurities, and mixes it (as he finds it
essential and best) with its own weight of sulphuret of lead—lead
combined with sulphur. Both the lead and the sulphur are wanted; for the
iron that is there present, as you see by the table, is one of the most
annoying substances in the treatment that you can imagine, because it is
not volatile; and while the iron remains adhering to the platinum, the
platinum will not flow readily. It cannot be sent away by a high
temperature—sent into the atmosphere so as to leave the platinum behind.
Well, then, a hundred parts of ore and a hundred parts of sulphuret of
lead, with about fifty parts of metallic lead, being all mingled together
in a crucible, the sulphur of the sulphuret takes the iron, the copper,
and some of the other metals and impurities, and combines with them to
form a slag; and as it goes on boiling and oxidising, it carries off the
iron, and so a great cleansing takes place.
Now, you ought to know that these metals, such as platinum, iridium, and
palladium, have a strong affinity for such metals as lead and tin, and
upon this a great deal depends. Very much depends upon the platinum
throwing out its impurities of iron and so forth, by being taken up with
the lead present in it. That you may have a notion of the great power that
platinum has of combining with other metals, I will refer you to a little
of the chemist’s experience—his bad experience. He knows very well that
if he takes a piece of platinum-foil, and heats a piece of lead upon it,
or if he takes a piece of platinum-foil, such as we have here, and heats
things upon it that have lead in them, his platinum is destroyed. I have
here a piece of platinum, and if I apply the heat of the spirit-lamp to
it, in consequence of the presence of this little piece of lead which I
will place on it, I shall make a hole in the metal. The heat of the lamp
itself would do no harm to the platinum, nor would other chemical means;
but because there is a little lead present, and there is an affinity
between the two substances, the bodies fuse together at once. You see the
hole I have made. It is large enough to put your finger in, though the
platinum itself was, as you saw, almost infusible, except by the voltaic
battery. For the purpose of shewing this fact in a more striking manner, I
have taken pieces of platinum-foil, tinfoil, and lead-foil, and rolled
them together; and if I apply the blowpipe to them, you will have, in
fact, a repetition on a larger scale of the experiment you saw just now
when the lead and platinum came together, and one spoiled the other. When
the metals are laid one upon the other, and folded together and heat
applied, you will not only see that the platinum runs to waste, but that
at the time when the platinum and lead are combined there is ignition
produced—there is a power of sustaining combustion. I have taken a large
piece, that you may see the phenomenon on a large scale. You saw the
ignition and the explosion which followed, of which we have here the
results—the consequence of the chemical affinity between the platinum and
the metals combined with it, which is the thing upon which Deville founds
his first result.
When he has melted these substances and stirred them well up, and so
obtained a complete mixture, he throws in air upon the surface to burn off
all the sulphur from the remaining sulphuret of lead; and at last he gets
an ingot of lead with platinum—much lead, comparatively, and little
platinum. He gets that in the crucible with a lot of scoriæ and other
things, which he treats afterwards. It is that platiniferous lead which we
have to deal with in our future process. Now, let me tell you what he does
with it. His first object is to get rid of the lead. He has thrown out all
the iron, and a number of other things, and he has got this kind of
compound indicated in the table. He may get it as high as 78 per cent. of
platinum, and 22 of lead; or 5, or 10, or 15 of platinum, and 95, or 90,
or 85 of lead (which he calls weak platinum), and he then places it in the
kind of vessel that you see before you. Suppose we had the mixture here;
we should have to make it hot, and then throw in air upon the surface. The
combustible metal—that is, the lead—and the part that will oxidise, are
thoroughly oxidised; the litharge would flow out in a fused state into a
vessel placed to receive it, and the platinum remains behind.
[Illustration: Fig. 36.]
Here is the process which Deville adopts for the purpose of casting off
the lead, after he has got out the platinum from the ore. (Having made use
of your friend, you get rid of him as quickly as you can.) He gets his
heat by applying the combination of oxygen and hydrogen, or of carburetted
fuel, for the purpose of producing a fire. I have here a source of
coal-gas; there I have a source of hydrogen; and here I have a source of
oxygen. I have here also one of the blowpipes used by Deville in his
process for working platinum in the way I have spoken of. There are two
pipes, and one of them goes to the source of coal-gas, and the other to
the supply of oxygen.
[Illustration: Fig. 37.]
By uniting these we obtain a flame of such a heat as to melt platinum. You
will, perhaps, hardly imagine what the heat is, unless you have some proof
of it; but you will soon see that I have actually the power of melting
platinum. Here is a piece of platinum-foil running like wax under the
flame which I am bringing to bear against it. The question, however, is
whether we shall get heat enough to melt, not this small quantity, but
large masses—many pounds of the metal. Having obtained heat like this,
the next consideration is what vessel is he to employ which could retain
the platinum when so heated, or bear the effects of the flame?  Such
vessels are happily well supplied at Paris, and are formed of a substance
which surrounds Paris; it is a kind of chalk (called, I believe, by
geologists, calcaire grossière), and it has the property of enduring an
extreme degree of heat. I am now going to get the highest heat that we can
obtain. First, I shew you the combustion of hydrogen by itself. I have not
a large supply, because the coal-gas is sufficient for most of our
purposes. If I put a piece of lime obtained from this chalk into the gas,
you see we get a pretty hot flame, which would burn one’s fingers a good
deal But now let me subject a piece of it to the joint action of oxygen
and hydrogen. I do this for the purpose of shewing you the value of lime
as a material for the furnaces and chambers that are to contain the
substances to be operated on, and that are consequently to sustain the
action of this extreme heat. Here we have the hydrogen and the oxygen,
which will give the most intense heat that can be obtained by chemical
action; and if I put a piece of lime into the flame, we get what is called
the lime-light. Now, with all the beauty and intensity of action which you
perceive, there is no sensible deterioration of the lime except by the
mechanical force of the current of gases rushing from the jet against the
lime, sweeping away such particles as are not strongly aggregated. “Vapour
of lime” some call it; and it may be so, but there is no other change of
the lime than that under the action of heat of this highly-exalted
chemical condition, though almost any other substance would melt at once.
Then, as to the way in which the heat is applied to the substance. It is
all very well for me to take a piece of antimony, and fuse it in the flame
of a blowpipe. But if I tried this piece in the ordinary lamp flame, I
should do nothing; if I tried a smaller piece, I should do little or
nothing; and if I tried a still smaller piece, I should do little or
nothing; yet I have a condition which will represent what Deville carries
to the highest possible extent, and which we all carry to the highest
extent, in the use of the blowpipe. Suppose I take this piece of antimony:
I shall not be able to melt it in that flame of the candle by merely
holding it there; yet, by taking pains, we can even melt a piece of
platinum there. This is a preparation which I made for the purpose of
proving the fusibility of platinum in a common candle. There is a piece of
wire, drawn by that ingenious process of Dr. Wollaston’s, not more than
the three-thousandth part of an inch in diameter. He put the wire into the
middle of a cylinder of silver, and drew both together until the whole
compound was exceedingly thin; and then he dissolved away the silver by
nitric acid. There was left in the centre a substance which I can scarcely
see with an eye-glass, but which I know is there, and which I can make
visible, as you see, by putting it into the candle, where the heat makes
it glow like a spark. I have again and again tried this experiment
up-stairs in my own room, and have easily fused this platinum-wire by a
common candle. You see we have, therefore, heat enough in the candle, as
in the voltaic battery, or in the highly-exalted combustion of the
blowpipe, but we do not supply a continuous source of heat. In the very
act of this becoming ignited, the heat radiates so fast that you cannot
accumulate enough to cause the fusion of the wire, except under the most
careful arrangement. Thus I cannot melt that piece of antimony by simply
putting it into the candle; but if I put it upon charcoal, and drive the
fiery current against it, there will be heat enough to melt it. The beauty
of the blowpipe is, that it sends hot air (making hot air by the
combustion of the flame) against the thing to be heated. I have only to
hold the antimony in the course of that current, and particle by particle
of the current impinges upon the antimony, and so we get it melted. You
now see it red-hot, and I have no doubt it will continue to burn if I
withdraw it from the flame and continue to force the air on it. Now, you
see it burning without any heat but that of its own combustion, which I am
keeping up by sending the air against it. It would go out in a moment if I
took away the current of air from it; but there it is burning, and the
more air I give it, by this or any other action, the better it is. So,
then, we have here not merely a mighty source of heat, but a means of
driving the heat forcibly against substances.
Let me shew you another experiment with a piece of iron. It will serve two
purposes—shewing you what the blowpipe does as a source of heat, and what
it does by sending that heat where it is wanted. I have taken iron in
contrast with silver or other metals, that you may see the difference of
action, and so be more interested in the experiment. Here is our fuel, the
coal-gas; and here our oxygen. Having thus my power of heat, I apply it to
the iron, which, as you see, soon gets red-hot. It is now flowing about
like a globule of melted mercury. But observe, I cannot raise any vapour:
it is now covered with a coat of melted oxide, and unless I have a great
power in my blowpipe, it is hardly possible to break through it. Now,
then, you see these beautiful sparks: you have not only a beautiful kind
of combustion, but you see the iron is being driven off, not producing
smoke, but burning in a fixed condition. How different this is from the
action of some other metals—that piece of antimony, for instance, which
we saw just now throwing off abundance of fumes. We can, of course, burn
away this iron by giving plenty of air to it; but with the bodies which
Deville wants to expose to this intense heat he has not that means: the
gas itself must have power enough to drive off the slag which forms on the
surface of the metal, and power to impinge upon the platinum so as to get
the full contact that he wants for the fusion to take place. We see here,
then, the means to which he resorts—oxygen, and either coal-gas or
water-gas[19], or pure hydrogen, for producing heat, and the blowpipe for
the purpose of impelling the heated current upon the metals.
I have two or three rough drawings here, representing the kind of furnaces
which he employs. They are larger, however, than the actual furnaces he
uses. Even the furnace in which he carries on that most serious operation
of fusing fifty pounds of platinum at once is not much more than half the
size of the drawing. It is made of a piece of lime below and a piece of
lime above. You see how beautifully lime sustains heat without altering in
shape; and you may have thought how beautifully it prevents the
dissipation of the heat by its very bad conducting powers.
[Illustration: Fig. 38]
While the front part of the lime which you saw here was so highly ignited,
I could at any moment touch the back of it without feeling any annoyance
from the heat So, by having a chamber of lime of this sort, he is able to
get a vessel to contain these metals with scarcely any loss of heat. He
puts the blowpipes through these apertures, and sends down these gases
upon the metals, which are gradually melted. He then puts in more metal
through a hole at the top. The results of the combustion issue out of the
aperture which you see represented. If there be strips of platinum, he
pushes them through the mouth out of which the heated current is coming,
and there they get red-hot and white-hot before they get into the bath of
platinum. So he is able to fuse a large body of platinum in this manner.
When the platinum is melted, he takes off the top and pours out from the
bottom piece, like a crucible, and makes his cast. This is the furnace by
which he fuses his forty pounds or fifty pounds of platinum at once. The
metal is raised to a heat that no eye can bear. There is no light and
shadow, no chiaro-oscuro there; all is the same intensity of glow. You
look in, and you cannot see where the metal or the lime is; it is all as
one. We have, therefore, a platform with a handle, which turns upon an
axis, that coincides with the gutter that is formed for the pouring of the
metal; and when all is known to be ready, by means of dark glasses, the
workmen take off the top piece and lift up the handle, and the mould being
then placed in a proper position, he knows that the issue of the metal
will be exactly in the line of the axis. No injury has ever happened from
the use of this plan. You know with what care it is necessary to carry
such a vessel of mercury as we have here, for fear of turning it over on
one side or the other; but if it be a vessel of melted platinum, the very
greatest care must be used, because the substance is twice as heavy: yet
no injury has been done to any of the workmen in this operation.
I have said that Deville depends upon intense heat for carrying off
vapour; and this brings me to the point of shewing how vapours are carried
off. Here is a basin of mercury, which boils easily, as you know, and
gives us the opportunity of observing the facts and principles which are
to guide us. I have here two poles of the battery, and if I bring them
into contact with the mercury, see what a development of vapour we have.
The mercury is flying off rapidly; and I might, if I pleased, put all the
company around me in a bath of mercury vapour. And so, if we take this
piece of lead and treat it in the same way, it will also give off vapour.
Observe the fumes that rise from it; and even if it was so far enclosed
from the air that you could not form any litharge, you would still have
those abundant fumes flying off. I may also take a piece of gold, and shew
you the same thing. I have here a piece of gold which I put upon a clean
surface of Paris limestone. Applying the heat of the blowpipe to it, you
see how the heat drives off the vapour; and if you notice at the end of
the Lecture, you will observe on the stone a purple patch of condensed
gold. Thus you see a proof of the volatilisation of gold. It is the same
with silver. You will not be startled if I sometimes use one agent and
sometimes another to illustrate a particular point. The volatility of gold
and silver is the same thing, whether it be effected by the voltaic
battery or by the blowpipe. [A lump of silver was placed in a charcoal
crucible between the poles of a voltaic battery.] Now, look at the fumes
of silver, and observe the peculiar and beautiful green colour which they
produce. We shall now shew you this same process of boiling the silver,
cast on a screen from the electric lamp which you have before you; and
while Dr. Tyndall is kindly getting the lamp ready for this purpose, let
me tell you that Deville proposes to throw out in this way all these
extraneous things that I have spoken of, except two—namely, iridium and
rhodium. It so happens, as he says, that iridium and rhodium do make the
metal more capable of resisting the attacks of acids than platinum itself.
Alloys are compounded up to 25 per cent. of rhodium and iridium, by which
the chemical inaction of the platinum is increased, and also its
malleability and other physical properties. [The image of the voltaic
discharge through vapour of silver was now thrown upon the screen.] What
you have now on the screen is an inverted image of what you saw when we
heated the silver before. The fine stream that you see around the silver
is the discharge of the electric force that takes place, giving you that
glorious green light which you see in the ray; and if Dr. Tyndall will
open the top of the lamp, you will see the quantity of fumes that will
come out of the aperture, shewing you at once the volatility of silver.
I have now finished this imperfect account. It is but an apology for not
having brought the process itself before you. I have done the best I could
under the circumstances; and I know your kindness well, for if I were not
aware that I might trust to it, I would not appear here so often as I have
done. The gradual loss of memory and of my other faculties is making
itself painfully evident to me, and requires, every time I appear before
you, the continued remembrance of your kindness to enable me to get
through my task. If I should happen to go on too long, or should fail in
doing what you might desire, remember it is yourselves who are chargeable,
by wishing me to remain. I have desired to retire, as I think every man
ought to do before his faculties become impaired; but I must confess that
the affection I have for this place, and for those who frequent this
place, is such, that I hardly know when the proper time has arrived.</div></body></text></TEI>