<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="17">
CHAPTER XVII.
He repelled me. “Sit down, sir, sit down! Do not follow
me, I beg of you; but sit down!”
His manner was earnest and emphatical. Mechanically
and without knowing what I did, I obeyed his direction.
He came towards me.
“I have no time,” added he, “for qualifying and form.
Tell me! am I the son of a man of honour or a villain?”
He saw I was shocked at the unexpected rudeness of
his question.
[187]
“Forgive me, my father! I have always been affectionate
and dutiful; I have ever looked up to you as my
model and my oracle. But I have been insulted! It never
was one of your lessons to teach me to bear an insult!”
“Is it,” replied I, with the sternness that the character
of a father will seldom fail to inspire under such circumstances,
“because you have been insulted, that you think
yourself authorised to come home and insult him to whom
you owe nothing but respect and reverence?”
“Stop, sir! Before you claim my reverence, you must
show your title to it, and wipe off the aspersions under
which you at present labour.”
“Insolent, presumptuous boy! Know that I am not by
you to be instructed in my duty, and will not answer so rude
a questioner! The down as yet scarcely shades your school-boy’s
cheek; and have you so forgotten the decencies of
life as to scoff your father?”—His eye brightened as I
spoke.
“You are right, sir. It gives me pleasure to see your
blood rise in return to my passion. Your accent is the
accent of innocence. But, indeed! the more innocent and
noble you shall prove yourself, the more readily will you
forgive my indignation.”
“I cannot tell. My temper does not fit me to bear the
rudeness of a son. Nor do I think that such behaviour as
this can be any credit to you, whatever may have been the
provocation. Tell me however what is the insult that has
thus deeply shaken you?”
“I went this afternoon to the tennis-court near the river,
and played several games with the young count Luitmann.
While we were playing, came in the chevalier Dupont, my
countryman. The insolence of his nature is a subject of
general remark; and he has, though I know not for what
reason, conceived a particular animosity to me. A trifling
dispute arose between us. We gradually warmed. He
threatened to turn me out of the court; I resented the
insult; and he passionately answered, that the son of an
adventurer and a sharper had no business there, and he
would take care I should never be admitted again. I attempted
to strike him, but was prevented; and presently[188]
learned that the sudden and unexplained way in which we
have emerged from poverty was the ground of his aspersion.
As I gained time, and reflected more distinctly upon
what was alleged, I felt that personal violence could never
remove an accusation of this sort. I saw too, though, intoxicated
as I had idly been with the unwonted splendour
to which I was introduced, I had not adverted to it at the
time, that the case was of a nature that required explanation.
I had been accustomed to reverence and an implicit faith
in the wisdom and rectitude of my parents, and therefore
encountered in silent submission the revolution of our fortune.
But this neutrality will suffice no longer.
“To you, sir, I resort for explanation. Send me back
to the insolent youth and his companions, with a plain and
unanswerable tale, that may put to silence for ever these
brutal scoffs and reproaches. Let it be seen this night
which of the two has most fully merited to be thrust out of
honourable society. I trust I have not so demeaned myself
but that our mutual companions will join to compel
this unmannered boor to retract his aspersions.”
“Charles, you are too warm and impetuous!”—
“Too warm, sir! when I hear my father loaded with
the foulest appellations?”
“You are young and ill qualified to terminate in the
proper way a business of this serious aspect: leave it to me!”
“Excuse me, my father! Though the names I have
repeated were bestowed upon you, it was against me that
the insult was employed. I must return immediately, and
obtain justice. This is a moment that must in some degree
fix my character for fortitude and determination, and I
cannot withdraw from the duty it imposes. Only tell me
what I have to say. Furnish me with a direct and unambiguous
explanation of what Dupont has objected to us,
and I undertake for the rest.”
“I see, my son, that you are moved, and I will trust you!”
He seized my hand, he gazed earnestly in my face, he
seemed prepared to devour every word I should utter.
“Gaspar de Coligny, the flower of the French nobility,
has been with me this morning. He has stated to me in
an ingenuous and friendly way the same difficulty with[189]
which Dupont has so brutally taunted you. I was meditating
and arranging my answer but now, when you entered
the room.”
As I uttered these words, Charles let go my hand, and
withdrew his eyes, with evident tokens of disappointment
and chagrin. He paused for a few moments, and then resumed:—
“Why do you tell me of meditation and arrangement!
Why did you send away Coligny unanswered, or why
baffle and evade the earnestness of my enquiries? I know
not all the sources of wealth; but I cannot doubt that the
medium through which wealth has honourably flowed may,
without effort and premeditation, easily be explained. A
just and a brave man acts fearlessly and with explicitness;
he does not shun, but court, the scrutiny of mankind; he
lives in the face of day, and the whole world confesses the
clearness of his spirit and the rectitude of his conduct.
“Sir, I have just set my foot on the threshold of life.
There is one lesson you have taught me, which I swear
never to forget,—to hold life and all its pleasures cheap, in
comparison with an honourable fame. My soul burns with
the love of distinction. I am impatient to burst away from
the goal, and commence the illustrious career. I feel that
I have a hand and a heart capable of executing the purposes
that my soul conceives. Uninured to dishonour, or
to any thing that should control the passion of my bosom,
think, sir, what are my emotions at what has just occurred!
“I was bred in obscurity and a humble station. I owed
this disadvantage, you tell me, to your error. I forgave you;
I was content; I felt that it was incumbent on me by my
sword and my own exertions to hew my way to distinction.
You have since exchanged the lowness of our situation for
riches and splendour. At this revolution I felt no displeasure;
I was well satisfied to start upon more advantageous
terms in the race I determined to run. But, sir,
whence came these riches? Riches and poverty are comparatively
indifferent to me; but I was not born to be a
mark for shame to point her finger at. A little while ago
you were poor; you were the author of your own poverty;
you dissipated your paternal estate. Did I reproach you?[190]
No; you were poor, but not dishonoured! I attended your
couch in sickness; I exerted my manual labour to support
you in affliction. I honoured you for your affection to my
mother; I listened with transport to the history of your
youth; I was convinced I should never blush to call Reginald
de St. Leon my father. I believed that lessons of
honour, so impressive as those you instilled into my infant
mind, could never flow but from an honourable spirit. Oh,
if there is any thing equivocal or ignoble in the riches we
have displayed, restore me, instantly restore me, to unblemished
and virtuous poverty!”
I was astonished at the firmness and manliness of spirit
that Charles upon this occasion discovered. I could scarcely
believe that these were the thoughts and words of a youth
under seventeen years of age. I felt that every thing illustrious
and excellent might be augured of one who, at these
immature years, manifested so lofty and generous a soul.
I could have pressed him in my arms, have indulged my
emotions in sobs and tears of transport, and congratulated
myself that I was father to so worthy a son. But his
temper and manners awed, and held me at a distance.
This was one consequence of the legacies of the stranger!
“Charles!” said I, “your virtues extort my confidence.
For the world a tale must be prepared that shall serve to
elude its curiosity and its malice. But to you I confess,
there is a mystery annexed to the acquisition of this wealth
that can never be explained.”
He stood aghast at my words. “Am I to believe my
ears? A tale prepared? A mystery never to be explained?
I adjure you by all that you love, and all that you hold
sacred——!”
His voice was drowned in a sudden gush of tears. With
an action of earnestness and deprecation, he took hold of
my hand.
“No, sir, no artful tale, no disguise, no hypocrisy!——”
As he spoke, his voice suddenly changed, his accent became
clear and determined.—“Will you consent this very hour
to quit the court of Dresden, and to resign fully and without
reserve this accursed wealth, for the acquisition of which you
refuse to account?”
[191]
“Whence,” replied I, “have you the insolence to make
such a proposal?——No, I will not!”
“Then I swear by the omnipresent and eternal God, you
shall never see or hear of me more!”
I perceived that this was no time for the assertion of
paternal authority. I saw that the poor boy was strangely
and deeply moved, and I endeavoured to soothe him. I
felt that the whole course of his education had inspired him
with an uncontrollable and independent spirit, and that it
was too late to endeavour to repress it.
“My dear Charles,” said I, “what is come to you?
When I listen to a language like this from your lips, I
scarcely know you for my son. This impertinent Dupont
has put you quite beside yourself. Another time we will
talk over the matter calmly; and depend upon it, every thing
shall be made out to your satisfaction.”
“Do not imagine, sir, that my self-possession is not
perfect and complete. I know what I do, and my resolution
is unalterable. If you have any explanation to give,
give it now. If you will yield to my proposal, declare your
assent, and I am again your son. But to bear the insults
of my fellows unanswered, or to live beneath the consciousness
of an artful and fictitious tale, no consideration on earth
shall induce me. I love you, sir; I cannot forget your
lessons or your virtues. I love my mother and my sisters;
no words can tell how dearly and how much. But my
resolution is taken; I separate myself from you all and for
ever. Nothing in my mind can come in competition with
a life of unblemished honour.”
“And are you such a novice, as to need the being told
that honour is a prize altogether out of the reach of an unknown
and desolate wanderer, such as you propose to become?
My wealth, boy, is unlimited, and can buy silence from the
malicious, and shouts and applause from all the world. A
golden key unlocks the career of glory, which the mean and
the pennyless are never allowed to enter.”
“I am not such a novice, as not to have heard the language
of vice, though I never expected to hear it from a
father. Poverty with integrity shall content me. The restless
eagerness of my spirit is so great, that I will trust to its[192]
suggestions, and hope to surmount the obstacles of external
appearance. If I am disappointed in this, and destined to
perish unheard of and unremembered, at least I will escape
reproach. I will neither be charged with the deeds, nor
give utterance to the maxims, of dishonour.”
“Charles,” replied I, “be not the calumniator of your
father! I swear to you by every thing that is sacred; and
you know my integrity; never did the breath of falsehood
pollute these lips;——”
He passionately interrupted me. “Did the stranger
bequeath you three thousand crowns? Have you lately
received an unexpected acquisition by the death of a near
relation in France?”
I was silent. This was not a moment for trifling and
equivocation.
“Oh, my father, how is your character changed and
subverted? You say true. For sixteen years I never heard
a breath of falsehood from your lips; I trusted you as I
would the oracles of eternal truth. But it is past! A few
short months have polluted and defaced a whole life of
integrity! In how many obscurities and fabulous inconsistencies
have you entangled yourself? Nor is it the least
of the calamities under which my heart sickens at this moment,
that I am reduced to hold language like this to a
father!”
What misery was mine, to hear myself thus arraigned
by my own son, and to be unable to utter one word in reply
to his accusations! To be thus triumphed over by a stripling;
and to feel the most cruel degradation, in the manifestation
of an excellence that ought to have swelled my
heart with gratulation and transport! I had recollected
my habitual feelings for near forty years of existence; I
had dropped from my memory my recent disgrace, and
dared to appeal to my acknowledged veracity; when this
retort from my son came to plunge me tenfold deeper in a
sea of shame. He proceeded:—
“I am no longer your son! I am compelled to disclaim
all affinity with you! But this is not all. By your
dishonour you have cut me off from the whole line of my
ancestors. I cannot claim affinity with them, without[193]
acknowledging my relation to you. You have extinguished
abruptly an illustrious house. The sun of St. Leon is set
for ever! Standing as I do a candidate for honourable fame,
I must henceforth stand by myself, as if a man could
be author of his own existence, and must expect no aid, no
favour, no prepossession, from any earthly consideration,
save what I am, and what I shall perform.”
“My son,” replied I, “you cut me to the heart. Such
is the virtue you display, that I must confess myself never
to have been worthy of you, and I begin to fear I am now
less worthy of you than ever. Yet you must suffer me to
finish what I was about to say when you so passionately
interrupted me. I swear then, by every thing that is sacred,
that I am innocent. Whatever interpretation the world
may put upon my sudden wealth, there is no shadow of dishonesty
or guilt connected with its acquisition. The circumstances
of the story are such that they must never be
disclosed; I am bound to secrecy by the most inviolable
obligations, and this has led me to utter a forged and inconsistent
tale. But my conscience has nothing with which to
reproach me. If then, Charles, my son, once my friend,
my best and dearest consolation!”—I pressed his hand,
and my voice faltered as I spoke,—“if you are resolute to
separate yourself from me, at least take this recollection
with you wherever you go,—Whatever may be my external
estimation, I am not the slave of vice, your father is
not a villain!”
“Alas, my father!” rejoined Charles, mournfully,
“what am I to believe? What secret can be involved in so
strange a reverse of fortune, that is not dishonourable?
You have given utterance to different fictions on the subject,
fictions that you now confess to be such; how am I
to be convinced that what you say at this moment is not
dictated more by a regard for my tranquillity, than by the
simplicity of conscious truth? If I believe you, I am afraid
my credit will be the offspring rather of inclination, than of
probability. And indeed, if I believe you, what avails it?
The world will not believe. Your character is blasted;
your honour is destroyed; and, unless I separate myself[194]
from you, and disown your name, I shall be involved in the
same disgrace.”
Saying thus, he left me, and in about half an hour returned.
His return I had not foreseen; I had made no use of his
absence. My mind was overcome, my understanding was
stupified, by a situation and events I had so little expected.
I had stood, unmoved, leaning against the wall, from the
instant of his departure. I seemed rooted to the spot, incapable
of calling up my fortitude, or arranging my ideas.
My eyes had rolled,—my brow was knit,—I had bit my lips
and my tongue with agony. From time to time I had muttered
a few words,—“My son! my son!—wealth!
wealth!—my wife!—my son!” but they were incoherent
and without meaning.
Charles re-entered the apartment where the preceding
conversation had passed, and the noise he made in entering
roused me. He had his hat in his hand, which he threw
from him, and exclaimed with an accent of dejection and
anguish, “My father!—farewell!”
“Cruel, cruel boy! can you persist in your harsh and
calamitous resolution? If you have no affection for me, yet
think of your mother and your sisters!”
Seek not, sir, to turn me from my purpose! The struggle
against it in my own bosom has been sufficiently severe;
but it must be executed.“—His voice, as he spoke, was inward,
stifled, and broken with the weight of his feelings.
“Then—farewell!” I replied. “Yet take with you
some provision for your long and perilous adventure. Name
the sum you will accept, and, whatever is its amount, it
shall instantly be yours.”
“I will have nothing. It is this wealth, with whose
splendour I was at first child enough to be dazzled, that has
destroyed us. My fingers shall not be contaminated with
an atom of it. What is to be my fate, as yet, I know not.
But I am young, and strong, and enterprising, and courageous.
The lessons of honour and nobility live in my
bosom. Though my instructor is lost, his instructions shall
not be vain!
“Once more farewell! From my heart I thank you for
your protestations of innocence. Never will I part with[195]
this last consolation, to believe them. I have recollected
the manner in which they were uttered; it was the manner
of truth. If there be any evidence of a contrary tendency,
that I will forget. Though to the world I shall be
without father and without relatives, I will still retain this
sacred consolation for my hours of retirement and solitude,
that my ancestors were honourable, and my father, in spite
of all presumptions to the contrary,—was innocent.
“How hard it is to quit for ever a family of love and
affection, as ours has been! Bear witness for me, how
deeply, I sympathised with you at Paris, in Switzerland, in
Constance! Though now you dissolve the tie between us,
yet, till now, never had a son greater reason for gratitude
to a father. You and my mother have made me what I
am; and that I may preserve what you have made me, I
now cast myself upon an untried world. The recollection
of what I found you in the past period of my life, shall be
for ever cherished in my memory!
“I quit my mother and my sisters without leave-taking
or adieu. It will be a fruitless and painful addition to
what each party must learn to bear. Dear, excellent, peerless
protector and companions of my early years! my
wishes are yours, my prayers shall for ever be poured out
for you! You, sir, who rob them of a son and a brother,
be careful to make up to them a loss, which I doubt not
they will account grievous! I can do nothing for them. I can
throw myself into the arms of poverty; it is my duty.
But, in doing so, I must separate myself from them, assuredly
innocent, and worthy of more and greater benefits
than I could ever confer on them!—Farewell!”
Saying this, he threw himself into my arms, and I felt
the agonies of a parting embrace.
</div></body></text></TEI>
