<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">
CHAPTER XXVII.
Meanwhile the unrelenting Agostino was fixed in his
purpose and incessant in his machinations. He believed
that the destructive mine was now sufficiently prepared,
and that he might proceed in all surety to the ultimate
explosion. He apprehended that he had advanced too far
to retract, that the death of Charon and the assault upon
Hector were calculated sufficiently to announce what was
to follow, and that it would be injudicious and idle to grant
me much respite for reflection. The passions of his associates
were wrought up to a frenzy of horror, and needed[282]
only a bold and artful director to urge them to any point of
fury and destruction.
Implicitly as I had confided in the decision of the
marchese, I had speedily reason to know that it was the
dictate of too sanguine and presumptuous a spirit. On
my return from his palace, and, on several subsequent
occasions, I found the manners of the populace altered
respecting me. They no longer viewed me with a sort of
reverential awe, or fled my approach. They insulted me
with their eyes, they muttered curses upon me in a voice
sufficiently audible to be understood, they broke forth in
gestures of abhorrence and derision. They regarded me
with looks of ferocious hatred; and when I had passed them,
their murmurs gradually swelled into shouts of triumphant
contumely. These symptoms however were progressive;
each day became more odious and intolerable than the last.
They who have never been placed in a situation like mine,
will never be able to do justice to my grievance. They
will perhaps say, that the calamity I now endured was a
trifling one, and that a weak mind only can be elevated by
the acclamations and huzzas of the multitude, or depressed
by their hisses and scorn. I did not, and I could not, feel
it so. There is no pleasure more congenial to the human
heart, than the approbation and affection of our fellows. I
call heaven to witness that I could mount the scaffold, surrounded
with an innumerable multitude to applaud my fortitude,
and to feel as it were on their own neck the blow that
ended me, and count it a festival. But I cannot bear to be
surrounded with tokens of abhorrence and scorn. I cannot
bear to look round me through an extended circle, and see the
impatience of despite in every face. Man was not born to
live alone. He is linked to his brethren by a thousand ties;
and, when those ties are broken, he ceases from all genuine
existence. Their complacence is a food more invigorating
than ambrosia; their aversion is a torment worse than that
of the damned. While I write, I seem again to hear resounding
in my ears the hootings and clamours of these
infatuated peasants. When heard indeed, they went to
my heart, and sat there colder than the aspic’s venom: they
rose to my throat with a sensation bitterer than wormwood.[283]
They unstrung all my muscles and nerves. I could not stay;
I could not fly. I wished myself buried deep in the centre
of the earth. I felt something worse, more revolting, more
opposite to all the prejudices and propensities of the soul,
than annihilation. I have known in various situations and
conditions of human life, what it was to be distressed, to be
dejected, to be miserable; but never in any other situation
have I felt a misery so concentrated, so gnawing and insufferable.
I began however, like the critics I am figuring to myself,
to despise the pusillanimity of my submission, and to believe
that, if I would only make a stand and turn round
upon my enemy, I should subdue him. This resolution I
could with difficulty have taken in the moment of attack;
it was formed in an interval of retrospect and reflection.
Having formed it, the contempt I should have felt for myself
would have been too exquisite, if I had failed to put it
in execution. I was not long at a loss for an opportunity.
In one of my walks I found myself pursued by a numerous
populace with a peculiar degree of inveteracy. I yielded
for some time, till I came to a place that appeared convenient
for the purpose of haranguing them. It was a
bench, placed upon a rising ground and sheltered behind
by a thicket, which had been erected for the purpose of
commanding a neighbouring prospect. I stopped; I
stepped upon the bench; I waved my hand towards the
multitude. They perceived my purpose with some degree
of confusion and surprise; they drew nearer. “Do not
listen to him! Do not hear a word he has to say!” cried
some of them. “Oh, hear him! hear him!” exclaimed
others. I obtained an audience.
“What is the cause,” said I, “of all this hatred and
persecution?”
“Because you are a wizard, a necromancer, a dealer in
the black art; because you are in league with hell, and
have sold yourself to the devil!” answered twenty voices
at once.
“Hear me,” replied I, “and I will convince you of my
innocence: but hear me in silence, and do not interrupt
me.”
[284]
“For myself, I have no belief in the existence of such
an art.”
This remark produced a general groan.
“Why should I have sold myself to the foe of mankind?
What could he give me, that should compensate me for
consigning myself over to him for ever hereafter? The
power of exhibiting strange and extraordinary tricks.
What a pitiful recompence? But, if I had bought this
power at so dear a price, should I hide it? Should I not
take every opportunity of exciting your reverence and astonishment?
Who has seen me perform any wonderful
feat? I live quietly among you, and give no cause of offence
to any. I live retired in the midst of my family. I
form no party or connections. I do not intrude into any
of your affairs, political or private. I do not even enter
into conferences with any of you, unless induced by the
apparent occasion of doing some good and benevolent
action.
“Quit then this ungenerous persecution! Do not turn
the fury of your resentment upon a harmless stranger!
You are Italians, the most polished and ingenious people
on the face of the earth: the most glorious monuments of
art, in building, in statuary, and in painting, are to be
found in the midst of you: ancient Italy governed the
world by her arms; modern Italy governs the world through
the medium of that pure and sublime religion of which
Providence has graciously made her the repository. Do
not stain the glory of this character! Show yourselves
worthy of the honour with which your name is heard in
every corner of the habitable world!”
While I was yet speaking, a large clot of mud reached
me, and struck me on the face and the upper part of my
breast. I calmly endeavoured to free myself from its effects
with my handkerchief; and, looking round me, demanded,
in the sacred spirit of conscious innocence, “How
have I deserved this treatment?”
Thus far I had been heard with a doubtful sentiment
of murmur and approbation, and I began to feel that I was
rather gaining ground upon my audience. But this new
insult seemed to turn the tide of popular impression in an
instant.
[285]
“Villain, renegado, accursed of God!” I heard from
every side; “did not you bewitch my cow? did not you
enchant my child? have not you killed my daughter?
Down with him! exterminate him! do not suffer him to
live!”
I continued my efforts to be heard. It was a critical
moment, a last experiment upon the power of firmness and
innocence to control the madness of infuriated superstition.
It was in vain. I was deafened with the noise that assailed
me. It was no longer shouts and clamours of disapprobation.
It was the roaring of tigers, and the shriek of
cannibals. Sticks, stones, and every kind of missile weapon
that offered itself, fell in showers around me. It seemed a
sort of miracle that I escaped instant destruction. I eluded
their pursuit: after some time I ventured to return to
my own house. I had in the interval terrified myself with
the idea that, having missed my person, they might have
hurried thither, and executed some terrible vengeance on
my helpless family. I found them however in safety: the
mob had for this time contented itself to disperse without
further mischief.
As soon as it was dark, I hastened to Pisa, and related
what had just occurred to my friend the marchese. He
was surprised; but he still adhered to his opinion. He
had never supposed, he told me, that a noisy and clamorous
mob was a proper subject upon which to make experiment
of the energy of truth; and he laughed at my attempt to
reason them out of their superstition. But they meant
nothing by all that had passed. It was the mere foam and
fury of a moment, poured out with vehemence, and then
dissipated in air. A certain set of politicians had for their
particular ends represented a mob as a terrific and formidable
engine: alas! they were rather to be pitied than condemned.
There was no malice in their hearts. They
were in reality a mere material machine, led on without
reflection, and, when they had committed a momentary
ravage, astonished themselves the most at the injury they
had perpetrated. They were as light and variable as a
feather, driven with every breath; and nothing could argue
greater obliquity of intellect than to suppose, because they[286]
were in a certain temper and sentiment to-day, that they
would be found in a similar temper and sentiment to-morrow.
The marchese however wished, he said, to relieve me from
the apprehension of this imaginary danger, and therefore offered
me the whole suite of his servants for the defence of my
house. He added that, among his friends and retainers in
the city of Pisa, he did not doubt in an hour’s time to be able
to raise a troop of four hundred men; and, whatever power
of that sort he possessed, he assured me was wholly at my
service. I was not convinced by the marchese’s arguments,
but I declined his offer. I could not bear to think that
blood should be spilled, and the lives of these poor ignorant
wretches sacrificed, for the preservation of a thing so worthless
in my eyes as the local property I possessed. I therefore
told the marchese, that I might perhaps wait yet a day
or two longer before I formed my resolution; but that, the
instant I saw one fresh symptom of the hostility of the villagers,
I was determined to take my family with me, and
remove far beyond the reach both of their terrors and their
hatred.
I staid two hours with the marchese, and then set out to
my own house. The way I took was by a private road,
open only to the neighbouring gentry, but of which my
servant carried the key. It led along the higher ground,
and commanded a view of the common highway. Considerably
before I reached my own habitation, I was struck
with the appearance of persons passing, in considerable
numbers, and in a tumultuous manner, along the public
road. Some of them were armed with clubs, and others
with torches. Their march however led, not towards my
house, but in an opposite direction. I mended my pace,
terrified with a sort of vague apprehension of what might
have happened, though I did not disguise to myself that
what I saw was not precisely that which I might have expected
to see, if they had been returned from demolishing
my property, and burning my house.
When I arrived, I found indeed that no mischief had
been actually committed, but that I was indebted for the
preservation of my house, and perhaps for the lives of my
wife and children, to the sagacity and presence of mind of[287]
Bernardin, the servant of my early years. My residence
had been the object against which the march of the populace
had been directed. Bernardin, perceiving their intentions,
had with great difficulty prevailed upon Hector to
keep out of sight. Nothing could be more adverse to the
feelings and inclination of my faithful negro; but, Bernardin
having convinced him that his appearance would
only exasperate the rage of the assailants, and that perhaps
every thing of importance to his master’s service and happiness
depended at present upon his concealment, Hector
yielded to his representations. This accomplished, Bernardin
next assembled the gardener and one or two labourers
in my employment, who happened to be at hand; and,
having furnished them with fire-arms, stationed them at
different windows, in the front of the house. With these
preparations, when the mob arrived he resolutely told them
that he would fire on the first person that attempted to break
in. They were staggered: furious as they appeared the
moment before, this threat held them in awe. They paraded
two or three times round the house, clattering their
arms, and pouring out vehement execrations; and then
withdrew, solemnly promising that they would return the
following night, and level the house with the ground.
I no longer yielded the smallest degree of credit to the
unsuspicious and confiding philosophy of the marchese
Filosanto. I sent off my wife and children before daybreak
for Lucca, determined to take shipping at the first
convenient port, and pass over into Spain. I was little
solicitous, for reasons with which the reader is already acquainted,
about my property and moveables: I had no motive
to induce me to fetter and clog my retreat, at this hour
of peril and terror, with a single article of rarity and price.
My furniture indeed was not splendid, but it was handsome
and valuable; and the indifference with which I resigned
the whole to the mercy of chance, was a matter of some
surprise to the persons around me. My servants offered
to defend my possessions, at the peril of their lives; but I
peremptorily forbade it. I would not even consent to
their taking away certain articles, by way of appropriating
them to their personal use. I believed that if I admitted[288]
a single act of that sort, I should find it no easy matter to
set limits to their avidity; and, as I had determined to
take none of my present servants with me, the negro and
Bernardin excepted, I feared that the apparent possession of
a single article that had been mine might hereafter mark
its proprietor a victim to the senseless rage of blindfold
superstition. I could easily make up to these honest and
faithful dependants the injury they might sustain from the
seeming severity of this order. I determined to shut up
my house, with all its present contents, as Joshua, the
captain of the Jews, drew a line of separation round the
profane possessions of Achan; and to leave the villagers, if
so it seemed good to them, to make of the whole a burnt-offering,
to propitiate the wrath of their avenging divinity.
The directions I issued being unhesitating and peremptory,
met with a ready submission from all my other domestics:
Hector only, the mild and complying Hector, of
whom obedience had hitherto appeared to constitute the
very soul, met my commands with a resolute refusal. The
present distressed appearance of my fortunes seemed to
have worked the poor fellow’s mind to a paroxysm of insanity.
He considered himself as the sole author of my
calamity. He reviled himself in the bitterest terms of
compunction and abhorrence. The language which the
agony of his soul forced from his lips, was such as could
not fail to impress upon my other servants a conviction of
the justice of the imputations that were now brought against
us. This however was of little importance. I must at all
events have been contented to leave behind me, in my present
neighbourhood, a name loaded with the execrations of
religious fanaticism. Hector imprecated upon himself a
thousand curses, if, so long as he continued to live, the populace
should lay hands upon a straw of my property. He
would not move so much as an inch from the defence of my
house. He would either, by preserving it, expiate in some
degree the mischief in which he had involved me, or fall and
be crushed to death in the midst of its ruins. Arguments
and expostulations were useless here: his mind was worked
up to too high a tone, to be susceptible of the patience necessary
for hearing or understanding any reasoning that was[289]
addressed to him. Authority itself was of no avail: for
the first and the last time he threw off the character of a
servant, and appeared obstinate, self-willed, and ungovernable.
It was only by direct violence that he could be forced
from the spot. I gave him in charge, with the most strict
orders not to suffer him to escape from their custody, to two
of his fellows.
This business being despatched, I went, at the invitation
of the marchese, to a small cottage he possessed at no great
distance from my own house. Its situation was so private
and retired, that few persons knew or could perceive that
there was any building on the spot. Here therefore I could
remain in the most perfect safety. I felt myself unaccountably
impelled to stay and witness the catastrophe of the
tragedy. I should not have been satisfied to continue in
uncertainty as to what it would prove. After all that had
passed, like the marchese, I should have been apt to accuse
myself of cowardice, and a mind soured and degenerate, if
the mob had not put their threats in execution. The marchese
himself was well pleased with my determination in
this respect. He was not yet convinced that I had not
painted to myself a danger, which had no adequate counterpart
in the world of realities.
I had not long to wait. The night had no sooner spread
an even-coloured and almost impervious veil over the
world, than the marchese, as if moved by a secret impulse
to witness what he yet refused to believe, came to me at the
cottage. He had scarcely arrived, when he heard the confused
murmurs and turbulence of the populace; for we
were near enough to distinguish almost every thing. As
they did not meet with the defence of the preceding evening,
the work they had undertaken was presently despatched.
We saw the flames ascend. We recognised the
shouts of infernal joy with which they witnessed the catastrophe.
When the marchese beheld what, till seen, he
would never admit to be possible, he burst out into a sort of
transport of misanthropy. He exclaimed that no innocence,
and no merit, could defend a man from the unrelenting antipathy
of his fellows. He saw that there was a principle
in the human mind destined to be eternally at war with improvement[290]
and science. No sooner did a man devote himself
to the pursuit of discoveries which, if ascertained,
would prove the highest benefit to his species, than his
whole species became armed against him. The midnight
oil was held to be the signal of infernal machinations. The
paleness of study and the furrows of thought were adjudged
to be the tokens of diabolical alliance. He saw, in the
transactions of that night, a pledge of the eternal triumph
of ignorance over wisdom. Above all, he regretted that
his countrymen, his dear Italians, should for ever blot their
honour and their character by such savage outrages.
Though myself the principal sufferer, I was obliged to perform
the part of the comforter and consoler, and endeavour
to calm the transport of agony that seized upon the susceptible
Filosanto. He was astonished, shocked, and beside
himself: I viewed the whole with the gloomy firmness of
a desperate resolution.
The worst event of this detested evening remains yet
unrecorded. Even now I tremble, while I attempt to
commit the story to my harmless paper. So far as related
to the mere destruction of my property, I looked on with a
philosophical indifference. I had no reason, and I disdained
to regret the loss of that which I had it in my
power to repair in a moment. I thought I had taken care
that no human life should be risqued upon this critical
occasion. But I was mistaken. I learned the next morning
with anguish inexpressible that Hector, the negro of
the prison of Constance, was no more. He had eluded
the vigilance of his keepers. No sooner was he at liberty,
then he hastened, unknown to every one, to die, as he had
declared he would, in the defence of my house. The mob
had burst into the house; they seized him alive. They
dragged him out in the midst of them; they insulted over
him, as the special favourite of the infernal king. They
inflicted on him every species of mockery and of torture;
they killed him joint by joint, and limb by limb.——The
pen drops from my lifeless hand.
What right had I to make this man the victim of my
idle and unhallowed pursuits? What has the art and
multiplication of gold in it, that should compensate the[291]
destruction of so ingenuous, so simple-hearted, so noble a
creature? If I had myself fallen into the hands of the
populace, it had been well: I was a criminal, worthy of
every retribution they could inflict upon me! Some men
perhaps will ask, why I lamented so bitterly over so uncultivated
and uninformed an individual as this negro.
There was however something so truly tragical in the fate
to which this creature in his generosity and remorse devoted
himself, that I believe for the moment I felt a
sharper pang in it, than in the strange and extraordinary
loss of my only son, or perhaps in the premature death of
my beloved Marguerite.
</div></body></text></TEI>
