<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="31">
CHAPTER XXXI.
The indulgence thus ostentatiously proclaimed by the father-inquisitor
was not exactly to my taste. Finding that all
the energy of mind I could apply to my defence was vain,
I determined to have recourse to a different mode of proceeding.
I received three admonitions, as they call them,
the substance of which I have already recited, in the course
of the first ten days of my confinement, and I then for
some time heard of the inquisitor no more. I understood
that it was frequently the practice, after three admonitions,
not to bring up the prisoner for further hearing
during a whole year; and it appeared sufficiently probable
from the last words addressed to me by my judge,
that this policy was intended to be employed in my
case. Without further delay therefore I resolved to recur
to the expedient in the use of which my power was
unbounded, and by a brilliant offer at once to subdue the
scruples, and secure the fidelity, of the person or persons
upon whom my safe custody might be found to depend.
All that was necessary was to convince the party to whom
I should propose the assisting me, of the reality of my
powers; and then to put carte blanche into his hands, or
rather to ascertain at once the extent of his hopes and demands,
and by a spirited and peremptory conduct to yield
them all. In the period which, immediately previous to
my present imprisonment, I had devoted to the meditation
of my future plans and the review of my past, I had severely
accused myself of half measures, and had determined to
abjure all hesitation and irresoluteness for the time to come.
It is not indeed to be wondered at, that, possessing a power
so utterly remote from common ideas and conceptions, and
which, speaking from experience, I do not hesitate to affirm
no mere effort of imagination is adequate to represent, I
should have acted below the prerogatives and demands of
my situation. This mistake I would make no more. I
would overwhelm opposition by the splendour of my proceedings,
and confound scruples by the dignity and princely[324]
magnificence of my appearance. Unshackled as I was with
connections, and risking no one’s happiness but my own, I
proposed to compel the human species to view me from an
awful distance, and to oblige every one that approached me
to feel his inferiority. It would be to the last degree disgraceful
and contemptible in me, being raised so far above
my peers in my privileges, if I were to fall below the ordinary
standard of a gallant man in the decision and firmness
of my system of conduct. Decision and firmness were the
principles to be exercised by me now; dignity and magnificence
must await their turn hereafter.
It was not long before I embraced an opportunity of
speaking to the man who waited on me with my daily
allotment of provisions, and I designed as shortly as possible
to proceed to that species of argument, in which I
principally confided to engage him in my cause. But he
did not suffer me to utter a sentence before with a very
expressive gesture he interrupted me. I had remarked
already the silence which seemed for ever to pervade this
dismal abode; but I had not ascribed importance enough to
this circumstance, to suppose that it could materially interfere
with the project I had formed. I now perceived the
countenance of my attendant to be overspread with terror
and alarm. He put his hand upon my mouth, and by his
attitude seemed earnestly to insist upon my conforming to
the rules of the prison. I was not however to be thus
diverted from my purpose. I seized his hands, and began
again to pursue the discourse I had meditated. This proceeding
on my part induced him to break the silence he
had hitherto preserved. He told me that if I did not instantly
set him at liberty, he would alarm the prison. I
loosed his hands. I then by every gesture I could devise
endeavoured to prevail on him to approach me, to suffer me
to confer with him in the lowest whisper, and assured
him that he should have no reason to repent his compliance.
I might as well have addressed myself to the walls that
inclosed me. He would not stay an instant; he would
yield in nothing. He burst from me abruptly, and, closing
the door of my cell, left me in solitude and darkness.
[325]
In the evening of the day of this attempt the keeper of
the prison entered my apartment. When he appeared, I
began to flatter myself that in this man I should find a
better subject for my purpose than in the poor turnkey who
had given me so unfavourable a prognostic of my success.
I lost no time in saying to him that I had something important
to communicate; but he peremptorily commanded
me to be silent, and listen to what he was about to say to
me. He told me that I had already been complained
against for speech, and I was now repeating my offence.
He advised me to ponder well the consequences of what I
was doing. The orders of the inquisition were rigorous
and inflexible. The cells were not so substantially separated
but that a voice might be heard from one to the other;
yet it had happened more than once, that a husband and
wife, a father and child, had for years been lodged next to
each other, without the smallest suspicion on either part of
the proximity of their situation. He was astonished at the
pertinacity of my behaviour. There was no government on
the face of the earth, he would venture to say, that had subjects
more obedient, more dutiful and exemplary than the
holy inquisition. Not a murmur was ever heard; not a
discontent ever expressed. All was humbleness, thankfulness,
and gratitude. He recommended to me to conform
myself to my situation, and let him hear no further complaints
of me. He had no sooner finished his harangue,
than he left me as abruptly as his servant had done. It is
not possible to impart any adequate image of the inflexibility
of his features, or the stern composure of his demeanour.
I now saw my situation in a different point of view.
Bribery was of no use, where all intercourse was denied.
Great God! into what position was I got? In the midst
of a great and populous city, at this time perhaps the metropolis
of the world, I heard occasionally from beyond the
limits of my prison the hum of busy throngs, or the shouts
of a tumultuous populace. Yet I was myself in the deepest
solitude. Like the wretched mariners I have somewhere
read of, shipwrecked upon a desert shore, I might remain
encaged, till I lost all recollection of European language,[326]
and all acquaintance with the sound of my own voice. A
jailor from time to time entered my apartment; but to me
he was simply a moving and breathing statue, his features
never moulded into the expression of a meaning, nor his
mouth opened for the utterance of a sound. From the first
I had been struck with the extreme and death-like silence
that characterised the place of my confinement; but my
mind was occupied with other thoughts, and I had not
adverted to the cause of the phenomenon. I had then felt
little inclination to the converse of a jailor; my natural disposition
was somewhat singular for a Frenchman, and inclined
to taciturnity: I had resolved to make a fair and
ample trial of the power of a just defence, where my innocence
was so complete and I was entirely disengaged
from those unfavourable appearances which had constituted
my misfortune at Constance; and I even rejoiced, that a
silence, which I regarded as casual and individual, delivered
me from all fear of impertinence in my attendant. With
how different a temper do we contemplate an incident
which, we persuade ourselves, continues to operate only
because we want inclination to remove it; and an incident
which is violently imposed, and to which, with the utmost
exertion of our strength, we cannot succeed to impart the
slightest shock! The external object is the same; its picture
in the intellectual sensorium how unlike! What a profound
and inconceivable refinement in the art of tyranny is this
silence! The jailor might well tell me, that beneath his
roofs there was neither complaint nor murmur, that the
very soul of its inhabitants was subdued, and that they
suffered the most unheard of oppressions without astonishment
or indignation. This is the peculiar prerogative of
despotism: it produces many symptoms of the same general
appearance as those which are derived from liberty and
justice. There are no remonstrances; there is no impatience
or violence; there is a calm, a fatal and accursed
tranquillity that pervades the whole. The spectator enters,
and for a time misinterprets every object he sees; he perceives
human bodies standing or moving around him; and
it is with the utmost surprise, if he has leisure and opportunity
to observe a little further, that he finds at last the[327]
things he sees to be the mere shades of men, cold, inert,
glaring bodies, which the heaven-born soul has long since
deserted. Wonderful, I hesitate not to affirm, is the genuine
and direct power of such a situation as that in which
I was now placed, upon the human imagination. What
was it then to me, to whom speech was not merely one of
those things, misnamed indulgences, misnamed luxuries,
upon which the desirableness and the health of human existence
depend; but who had looked to it as the only and
the assured means of my rescue from this scene of horrors!
I intreat the reader to pardon me, when I confess, that the
operation of the discovery I made was so overwhelming
and apparently desperate, that it was some weeks, I might
say months, before my mind recovered its wonted bias and
activity.
It was towards the close of the period I have named,
that a new incident, concurring with that familiarity which
serves in some measure to disarm every mischief of its
sting, restored and re-awakened my mind. I had vegetated
now for some time, if the metaphor can with propriety be
applied to existence in a noxious and empoisoned air, by
which all vegetation would have been undermined, and
which the vital principle in man is scarcely competent to
surmount; and in all this period had encountered nothing
from without, nor received any intimation, that could in the
slightest degree interrupt the progressive destruction and
waste of the soul. One day, at the customary hour of my
being attended by my warder, I was surprised to see him
bring with him a visiter to my cell. The unknown was a
man with grey hairs and a silver beard: though once tall,
he now stooped considerably, and supported himself with a
staff: his dress was simple and neat, and his whole appearance
prepossessing. A sweet serenity was diffused over his
countenance; yet there were occasionally a fire, and a contemplative
grasp of thought, expressed in his eyes, which
sufficiently proved to me that his serenity was not the result
of vacancy. All this I discerned by the faint and uncertain
light of a small lamp which the warder had brought with
him, and placed upon my table. The introduction was
performed in silence, and the warder left us alone. The[328]
unknown beckoned me to be seated, for the first emotion
of surprise at the entrance of a stranger had caused me to
start on my feet; and, opening a folding stool he had received
from my attendant, he placed himself beside me.
He then addressed me in a low voice, and told me, that
the humanity of the fathers of the inquisition had given
him permission to visit me, and that, if I would be so
obliging, in conformity to the regulations of the prison, as
to lower my voice to the standard of his, we were at liberty
to confer together. He hoped the conference would be some
relief to my solitude, if not lead to my complete liberation.
He then unfolded to me his story. He told me that he,
like myself, had been committed to the prisons of the inquisition
upon an accusation of sorcery. Having advanced
thus far, he stopped. He talked miscellaneously and digressively
of wizards and their familiars, of possessions and demons,
of charms, spells, talismans and incantations, even of
the elixir vitæ and the philosopher’s stone. Sometimes in
the progress of this discourse I could perceive him observing
me with the utmost narrowness, as if he would dive into
my soul; and again, particularly when he caught a glance
of suspicion in my eye, with infinite address changing his
attitude and tone, and assuming a surprising air of ingenuousness
and gaiety. In a word he was a consummate
actor. It was evident, whether his designs were hostile or
friendly, that his purpose was to make himself master of
my secret. I asked him whether the accusation of sorcery
which had been preferred against him, were well founded
or a calumny. He evaded that question, and was only
influenced by it to talk more copiously and fluently on other
topics, with the apparent design of making me forget the
enquiry I had made. He avoided anticipation, lest he should
miscalculate and take wrong ground in my affair; and,
though superficially he seemed communicative, I found that
he scarcely told me respecting himself any one thing definite
and clear. He celebrated the clemency of the fathers of the
inquisition. He said, they seemed to regard themselves as
the adoptive parents of those they held in their custody,
and were anxious solely for the restoration of souls. In
their exterior they were austere, and had unfortunately contracted[329]
a forbidding manner; but he had soon found, upon
a closer inspection of their character, that the only way to
deal successfully with them was to repose in them a perfect
confidence. This panegyric was not resorted to till he had
exhausted the various topics by which he had hoped himself
to extort my secret from me. I asked him, whether
the effect of his reposing confidence had been an abjuration
of sorcery, and reconciliation to the church? But this question
experienced the fate of every other that I addressed to
him. He only told me generally, that he had every reason
to be satisfied with, and to speak well of, the treatment he
had experienced in the house of the inquisition. He possessed,
or rather, as I believed, affected, a character of
thoughtless garrulity and loquacity, well adapted to cover
the strange deviations and abrupt transitions that marked
his discourse. It was certainly singularly contrasted with
that close and penetrating air which from time to time I
remarked in him.
The reader may deem it surprising and unaccountable;
but certain it is I took uncommon delight in this man’s
company. I pressed him earnestly to repeat his visits, and
would scarcely suffer him to depart, till he had promised
to come to me again the next day or the day after. Yet I
looked on him as my mortal enemy, and had no doubt that
he was one of the infamous wretches, employed by the
policy of the inquisition, and well known beneath those
hated roofs by the appellation of moscas. Various reasons
may be assigned for my conduct in this particular. Let it
first be remembered that I was alone, and for months had
not heard the sound of my own voice. No incident marked
my days; no object arrested my attention. A dull, heavy,
pestilential, soul-depressing monotony formed the history
of my life. If in this situation I had been visited by a
mouse or a rat, I should indefatigably have sought to get
within reach of it, I should have put it to my bosom, and have
felt with exultation the beat of an animal pulse, the warmth
of animal life pressing responsively on my heart. With
what eager appetite I should have mixed in scenes of calamity
and cruelty, intolerable to any other eye, glad for
myself that even upon such terms I could escape the frostbound[330]
winter of the soul! How I should have rejoiced,
like king Richard of England, to see four grim and death-dealing
assassins enter my cell, like him to struggle and
wrestle and contend with my murderers, though, as in his
case, wounds and a fatal end should be the result! Thus
feeling then, it is little wonderful that I should have hailed
with pleasure the visit of the mosca.
But this was not all. While I conferred with, or rather
listened to my visiter, that pride and self complacency,
which I suspect to be the main, or at least the indispensable,
ingredient of all our pleasures, revived in my heart. I believed
that he was set upon me by these insatiable bloodsuckers
of the inquisition, that he might ensnare me with
his questions, and treacherously inveigle me to the faggot
and the stake. I felt a last, lambent intimation of pride
within me, when my heart whispered me, “This man shall
not attain his ends.” I secretly defied his arts, and amused
myself with baffling his most cunning devices. I had now
some one with whom to measure myself. The comparison,
I own, for a descendant of the counts of St. Leon, was a
humble one; but it is not permitted a prisoner in the jails
of the inquisition to be fastidious in his pleasures. This
man I played with at my ease, and laughed at his stratagems.
I therefore felt that I was his superior, and, which
was a sensation I had not lately been accustomed to, that I
was somebody. These feelings recommended to me his
visits.
But what was much more material, I looked further,
and proposed an ultimate end to this occurrence. Let it
be recollected what was my unhappiness, when I found
myself, if I may be allowed the expression, suddenly deprived
of speech, and then it will easily be understood how
sincerely I rejoiced to have this faculty restored to me.
Speech, as I have already said, I had regarded as the only
and assured means of my deliverance from this scene of
horrors. I therefore doubted not that from this miserable
tool of my oppressors I would obtain my enlargement. I
stood firmly on my guard. I permitted him to run out
the whole length of his own project without interruption.
By this delay I should better understand his character, and[331]
finally seize it with a more decisive grasp. Thus purposing,
I allowed three or four visits to pass before I opened to the
mosca my own proposal. I designed unexpectedly to turn
the tables upon him, to surprise and finish with him at
once. I knew not that all this precaution was necessary,
but I played for too deep a stake, not to be anxious to omit
nothing, which hereafter in retrospect I might reproach
myself that I had omitted.
The time was at length come, at which I judged it convenient
to execute what I had planned in my mind. I
began with an attempt to mortify and humble my guest in
his own eyes, that he might lose the pride to make the
smallest resistance to my proposal.
“Do you think, my good sir,” cried I, “that I have not
perfectly understood your intentions all this while? You have
pretended to be my friend, and to come to me for my good.
I know that every secret I reposed in your fidelity, every
word that I might unguardedly have dropped, every look
and gesture that could have been interpreted to my disadvantage,
would have been instantly reported to the fathers
of the inquisition. Why, what a poor and miserable fool
must you have imagined me to be! How came you into
my cell? Had you a secret key by which you found your
way hither unknown? Could you ever have come into my
apartment, if you had not been employed? You fawn
upon me, and are the tame and passive agent of my merciless
destroyers! Shame on such base and perfidious proceedings!
Is this religion, that you should flatter and
cajole and lie to a man, purely that you may have the gratification
at last of burning him alive? If you or your
masters can make out any thing to my disadvantage, let
them make it out in the way of fair and open trial, by the
production of direct evidence, and calling on me for my
defence. They style themselves the champions of Christendom
and ornaments of our holy faith; they pretend to
an extraordinary degree of sanctity, and would have all men
bow down in mute reverence and astonishment at their
godliness; and yet they have recourse to means so base,
that the most profligate and abandoned tyrant upon
record would have disdained to employ them. But, base[332]
as are the judges and assessors of the court in whose prison
I stand, even they scorn the meanness of the perfidious task
in which you have engaged.”
The vehemence I put into the suppressed and under-tone
with which I delivered these reproaches, seemed to produce
no emotion in my guest. He dropped his staff upon his
shoulder; he meekly folded his arms upon his bosom, and
answered, that he had long since learned to bear every
contumely for the cause of God and the Redeemer: they
were heaven-directed chastisements, which his manifold sins
and iniquities had amply deserved.
“Hypocrite!” replied I, “would you make me believe
that a conscientious motive can prompt such conduct as
yours, can mould your features into a treacherous expression
of kindness, and fill your mouth with lies and deceptions
innumerable?”
“No proceedings,” rejoined he, with an unaltered air,
“are base, that God and his church prescribe. I take up
the cross with cheerfulness, and glory in my shame. The
more ignominious in the eyes of an unregenerate world is
my conduct, the more entire and implicit does it prove my
obedience to be.”
My heart swelled within me as he talked. I could lend
no attention to such despicable cant, and was ashamed to
see the most profligate conduct assuming to itself the pretensions
to an extraordinary degree of sanctity and disinterestedness.
“Come, come,” said I, “dissembler; I know that nothing
could buy a man to so loathsome an office but money.
You are some galley-slave, some wretch, who by your complicated
crimes have forfeited your life to the community,
and are now permitted to earn a miserable existence by
lying in wait for the unfortunate, and engaging in arts at
which humanity shudders. I take you upon your own
terms; you are the man I want. Assist me to escape; go
with me to some safer and less cruel country; I will reward
you to the extent of your wishes. Give me your
hand; an estate of six thousand pistoles per annum, without
further condition, waits your acceptance. I invoke all
the powers, sacred to truth and punishers of deceit, to[333]
witness, that I have ability to make good the whole of what
I promise.”
While I spoke, I could perceive an extraordinary revolution
taking place in my guest. The meekness and tranquillity
of his countenance subsided; his eye became
animated and alive. I hailed the auspicious omen; I urged
my proposal with all the impetuosity I could exert and all
the arguments I could devise. At length I paused. I
looked again at the countenance of the mosca; I was less
pleased than before. The expression did not seem to be
that of assent and congratulation; it was rather of horror
and alarm.
“St. Jago, and all the saints and angels of heaven, protect
me!” exclaimed he. “What do I hear? A full
confession of guilt! And art thou then the confederate of
the prince of the powers of darkness? If we were not here,
in the holy house of inquisition, I should die at this moment
with fear that the roof would fall and crush us together.
I should expect hell to swallow me alive, for being found in
thy unhallowed society.” He trembled with every expression
of the sincerest terror and aversion.
“‘Thy money perish with thee,’ thou second Elymas,
like him ‘full of all subtlety and mischief, child of the
devil, enemy of all righteousness!’ Blasted be thy offers!
Have I for this devoted myself to the service of God, assiduously
sought out the basest and vilest offices of that
service, and loaded myself with ignominy here, that I might
obtain a crown of glory hereafter? and am I now to be assaulted
with the worst of Satan’s temptations? Even so,
Lord, if such be thy will! Oh, poor, miserable, deluded
victim of the arch-deceiver of mankind, what has the devil
done for thee? He has persuaded thee that thou art rich;
and thou wantest every joy and every necessary of life.
He has promised to be thy friend; and he brings thee to
the faggot and flames in this world, as an earnest of thy
eternal damnation hereafter.”
My visiter had no sooner thus poured out the tumult and
agitation of his soul, than he left me abruptly, and I saw
him no more.
Such was the event of my attempt to bribe the officers of[334]
the inquisition. In my first experiment I could not even obtain
a hearing; in what followed, my proposals were rejected
with all the transports of religious abhorrence. What I
offered indeed, however dazzling in the statement, had not
in fact the nature of a temptation. He to whom I addressed
it gave no credit to my assertions; he thought that I was
the mere drivelling dupe of him he called the arch-deceiver
of mankind, or that my money, when possessed, would soon
change its figure, and from seeming pieces of solid coin be
converted into pieces of horn or of shells. Even if he had
not apprehended such a metamorphosis, he would yet have
regarded every doubloon he received as the price of his
continual adversity here, and damnation hereafter. I gained
nothing favourable for my situation by the trial I had made,
but I added a new chapter to my knowledge of human
nature. I found, that to be a knave, it was not necessary
to be an infidel: I corrected the too hasty conclusion which
I had adopted with the rest of my contemporaries, that he
whose conduct was infamous, must inevitably be destitute
of religious impressions and belief; and I became satisfied
that a man, while he practised every vice that can disgrace
human nature, might imagine he was doing God service.
Enough of the interior of the prison of the inquisition.
I remained a tenant of this wretched mansion twelve years.
Though the wretch who had been placed upon me as a spy,
was, from my proposal to him, satisfied of my guilt, his
superiors were not so. They found nothing in what he
reported definitive as to the nature of my unlawful practices,
and they could extort from me no further confession.
They therefore adhered to their favourite maxim, to avoid
the precipitate mistakes of other tribunals, and to allow
their prisoner full time to develop his guilt, or, as they pretended,
to establish his innocence. Perhaps too the temper
of the prince who now filled the Spanish throne, contributed
to my safety. They could not content themselves
with a less punishment for so obstinate and incorrigible a
heretic, than that of the flames; but, during the reign of
the emperor Charles, this species of punishment for heresy
was rarely inflicted, and only one or two contumacious, at
intervals, were delivered over to the executioner at a time.[335]
The institution whose victim I had become, looked for a
richer and more abundant harvest from the well-known
piety and zeal of his successor.
I pass over the rest of the years of my tedious imprisonment
They had in them a sad and death-like uniformity.
What surprising or agreeable adventures can be
expected from a man closed up within the four walls of a
dungeon? Yet it is not altogether the uniformity of this
period that determines me not to dwell upon and expand it.
Twelve years cannot pass in the life of man without many
memorable incidents and occurrences. He that should be
buried alive in the deepest cavern of the earth, if he were
not an idiot, or incapable of the task of narration, and could
subsist twelve years in that situation, could tell of things
that occurred to him, that might fill the busy man of the
world with thoughts and speculation almost to bursting. I
might unfold the secrets of my prison-house, but that I
will not. I refuse the consequences of that story both to
my readers and myself. I have no inclination to drive the
most delicate or susceptible of my readers mad with horrors.
I could convince such, if such there are, who suppose my
faculties were altogether benumbed or dead, that it was not
so. I did indeed pass days, perhaps weeks, in a condition
of that sort. But at other times my mind was roused, and
became busy, restless, impatient, and inventive. There was
no mode of escape that I did not ruminate upon or attempt;
not to mention that, though my body was restrained, my
mind occasionally soared to the furthest regions of the empyrean,
or plunged into the deepest of the recesses in which
nature conceals her operations. All systems of philosophising
became familiar to me. I revolved every different
fable that has been constructed respecting the invisible
powers that superintend the events of the boundless universe;
and I fearlessly traced out and developed the boldest conjectures
and assertions of demonism or atheism. As the
humour of the moment led me, I derived misery or consolation
from each of these systems in their turn.—But memory,
bitter memory, unperceived by its lord, is seizing my
pen, and running away with my narrative. Enough, enough
of the interior of the prison of the inquisition!

[336]
</div></body></text></TEI>
