<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="38">
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
Aware of the difficulties which unavoidably sprung out of
the nature of my situation, I resolved immediately to endeavour
to supply them to the best of my power. I conceived
that there was no consideration so urgent upon me
at the present moment, as that I should without loss of
time create to myself connections that might balance and
keep at bay the sallies of arbitrary rule, and that I should
weave with my own hand the cords of friendship.
I had no sooner formed this project, than an individual
suggested himself to my reflections, whom I judged to be,
by a singular concurrence of circumstances, happily fitted
to be the subject of my experiment, and admirably qualified
to afford me protection in the most unfavourable events.
The name of this man was Bethlem Gabor. He had been
some time before brought to me by one of his friends, and
he was a man whom for a thousand reasons it was impossible
to see and converse with, without receiving the most
indelible impression. He was the lineal representative of
one of the most illustrious houses in Hungary. His vocation,
like that of the majority of the Hungarian nobility,
had been arms; but, in the midst of a fraternity all of
whom were warlike, he stood conspicuous and alone. His
courage, though cool and deliberate, almost mounted to a
degree of desperate rashness; and the fertility of his invention,
and the variety of his stratagems did not fall short
of his courage. The celerity of his measures was equally
distinguished; distance was no bar to him; and he had
no sooner conceived a project, however arduous, than it was
executed. He had formed under his own eye a band of
men like himself, impetuous yet deliberate, swift in execution,
silent in march, invincible to hardship, contemners
of fatigue, of difficulties, of hunger, and of thirst. When
introduced to me, he was upwards of fifty years of age.
He was more than six feet in stature; and yet he was built
as if it had been a colossus, destined to sustain the weight
of the starry heavens. His voice was like thunder; and he[396]
never uttered a word, but it seemed to shake his manly chest.
His head and chin were clothed with a thick and shaggy hair,
in colour a dead black. He had suffered considerable mutilation
in the services through which he had passed; of
one of his hands three fingers were gone; the sight of his
right eye was extinguished, and the cheek half shot away,
while the same explosion had burned his complexion into a
colour that was universally dun or black. His nose was
scarred, and his lips were thick and large. Bethlem Gabor,
though universally respected for the honour and magnanimity
of a soldier, was not less remarkable for habits of
reserve and taciturnity. But these habits misfortune had
caused to become more deeply ingrafted in his nature.
During one of his military excursions, a party of marauders
had in his absence surprised his castle, burned it to the
ground, and savagely murdered his wife and children,
and every living creature within the walls. The same
stroke that rendered him childless made him also a beggar.
He had been regarded for his proceedings as an adherent
to the Turkish standard, but he had always tenaciously
maintained the most complete independence. The adversity
that had now fallen upon him was too great. He
would not become a pensioner of the sultan; despair had
taken fast possession of his heart. He disbanded the body
of men he had formed, and wandered a solitary outcast
upon the face of his country. For some time he seemed to
have a savage complacence in conceiving that the evil he
had suffered was past all remedy, and in spurning at those
palliations and disguises with which vulgar souls are
accustomed to assuage their woe. Yet the energy of his
nature would not suffer him to rest: he wandered an outcast;
but every day engendered some new thought or passion:
and it appeared probable that he would not yet quit
the stage of existence till he had left behind him the remembrances
of a terrible and desolating revenge.
It may seem strange that such a man as I have described
should be the individual I selected out of the whole
Hungarian nation to make my friend. It may seem that
his qualities were better adapted to repel than attract. My
choice would not appear strange, if the reader could have[397]
conversed with him, as I did. He was hideous to the sight;
and he never addressed himself to speak, that I did not
feel my very heart shudder within me. Seldom did he
allow himself to open his thoughts; but, when he did,
great God! what supernatural eloquence seemed to inspire
and enshroud him! Not that upon such occasions he was
copious and Ciceronian, but that every muscle and every
limb seemed to live, and to quiver with the thoughts he
expressed. The hearer could not refuse to venerate, as
well as fear him. I never pitied him; Bethlem Gabor’s
was a soul that soared to a sightless distance above the
sphere of pity; I can scarcely say I sympathised with him;
but, when I listened to his complaints, rather let me say
his invectives, I was astonished, overwhelmed, and motionless.
The secret of the effects he thus produced, lay
in his own way of feeling the incidents he described. Look
at him, when he sat alone, wrapped in meditation, you
would say, “That is a man of iron; though adversity pour
her fiercest darts upon him, he is invulnerable; he is of
too colossal a structure to be accessible to human feelings
and human affections.” Listen to his narrative, or rather
to the bursts of passion, which with him supplied the place
and performed the functions of narrative, you would soon
confess your mistake. While he spoke, he ceased to be a
man, and became something more amazing. When he alluded
to what he had endured, you did not compassionate
him, for you felt that he was a creature of another nature;
but you confessed, that never man seemed to have suffered
so much, or to savour with such bitterness the cup of woe.
He did not love his wife or his children as any other man
would do; he probably never dandled or fondled them; his
love was speechless; and disdaining the common modes of
exhibition, it might sometimes be mistaken for indifference.
But it brooded over and clung round his heart; and, when
it was disturbed, when the strong ties of domestic charity
were by the merciless hand of war snapped asunder, you
then saw its voluminous folds spread and convulsed before
you, gigantic and immeasurable. He cursed their murderers;
he cursed mankind; he rose up in fierce defiance
of eternal providence; and your blood curdled within you[398]
as he spoke. Such was Bethlem Gabor: I could not help
admiring him: his greatness excited my wonder and my
reverence; and, while his manners awed and overwhelmed
me, I felt an inexplicable attachment to his person still increasing
in my bosom.
On his part, my kindness and partiality appeared scarcely
less pleasing to Bethlem Gabor, than his character and
discourse were fascinating to me. He had found himself
without a confidant or a friend. His wife and his children
in a certain degree understood him; and, though he had
an atmosphere of repulsion beyond which no mortal ever
penetrated, they came to the edge of that, and rested there;
they trembled involuntarily at his aspect, but at the same
time they adored and they loved him. The rest of the
world viewed him from a more fearful distance; respected
him, but dared not even in fancy be familiar with him.
When therefore he lost his family, he lost his all. He
roamed the earth in solitude, and all men made room for
him as he passed. I was the first who, since the fatal
event that had made him childless and a beggar, had
courted his society, and invited his communications. I
had dared to take the lion by the paw, and seat myself
next him in his den. There was a similarity in our fortunes
that secretly endeared him to me. We had each by
the malice of a hostile destiny, though in a very different
manner, been deprived of our families; we were each of
us alone. Fated each to be hereafter for ever alone; we
blended ourselves the one with the other as perfectly as we
could. Often over our gloomy bowl we mingled groans,
and sweetened our draught as we drank it with maledictions.
In the school of Bethlem Gabor I became acquainted
with the delights of melancholy—-of a melancholy,
not that contracted, but that swelled the soul—of a melancholy
that looked down upon the world with indignation,
and that relieved its secret load with curses and execrations.
We frequently continued whole nights in the participation
of these bitter joys; and were surprised, still at our serious
board, by the light of the morrow’s sun.
I have now, I believe, fully accounted for our intimacy,
and displayed the ligatures that secretly bound us to each[399]
other. It is scarcely necessary to add, that my understanding
confirmed what my heart impelled. Bethlem
Gabor appeared to me the fittest man in the world upon
whom to fix for my friend. We were qualified mutually
to benefit each other. My kindness, my unremitted attentions,
the earnestness with which I listened to and
soothed his griefs, mitigated their agony. I proposed,
when I could once more reconcile and incite him to activity,
to repair his castle, and restore his fortune. On
the other hand, he was, of all the persons I could have
pitched upon, the ablest to protect me. By his birth he
ranked among the first men of his country; by his ability,
at least as a partisan soldier, a character at that time highly
esteemed, he rose above them all.
For some time I regarded Bethlem Gabor as entirely
my friend, and I consulted him in every thing, in which,
compatibly with the legacy of the stranger of the summer-house,
I could consult him. I told him of the suspicions of
the bashaw, and the precariousness of my safety. I demanded
his advice as to the best method of securing it.
Ought I to regard it as a more effectual or as a cheaper
expedient, to attempt to purchase the countenance of the
sultan, instead of condescending to bribe his minister?
Ought I to set up for myself, and by rendering myself the
independent prince of one of the Hungarian provinces,
defy the Turk, or at least endeavour to negotiate with him
from a more respectable and commanding situation? I
said more than enough under these heads, as it afterwards
appeared, to awaken strange imaginations in a mind of so
much penetration as that of Bethlem Gabor. In fine, I
demanded of him whether, in case of any great and formidable
danger falling on me, he would to the utmost of his
power afford me protection? When the question was first
started, he swore to me with his customary impressiveness
and energy that he would.
While I was thus employed in consulting him, and
opening to him as far as was practicable my prospects and
fears, I did not less succeed in dissipating or suspending
the despair of his melancholy. It was of benefit to him
in this respect, that, by opening to him my affairs, I from[400]
time to time called off his attention from his personal misfortunes.
I proposed to him the rebuilding his castle, and
I at length obtained his permission to send off a corps of
workmen for that purpose. Beside the castle in which his
wife and children had been murdered, and which the
marauders had nearly destroyed, he had one considerably
stronger, though void of all recommendation from cheerfulness
or beauty, in the more northerly part of the kingdom.
This we visited together. I restored the condition
of his fields; with considerable difficulty I replaced the
cattle he had lost, by purchases in Poland; and I revived
his dilapidated revenues. At first he felt an invincible
repugnance to the receiving any advantage from the bounty
of another; but by continual remonstrances I was able to persuade
him, that he owed me nothing, and that what I did
was no more than was required from me by a regard for
my own safety.
If ever on the face of the earth there lived a misanthrope,
Bethlem Gabor was the man. Never for a moment did he
forget or forgive the sanguinary catastrophe of his family;
and for his own misfortunes he seemed to have vowed vengeance
against the whole human race. He almost hated
the very face of man; and, when expressions of cheerfulness,
peace, and contentment discovered themselves in his
presence, I could see, by the hideous working of his features,
that his spirit experienced intolerable agonies. To him
such expressions were tones horribly discordant; all was
uproar and havoc within his own bosom, and the gaiety of
other men inspired him with sentiments of invincible antipathy.
He never saw a festive board without an inclination
to overturn it; or a father encircled with a smiling family,
without feeling his soul thrill with suggestions of murder.
Something, I know not what, withheld his hand: it might
be some remaining atom of humanity: it might be—for
his whole character was contemplative and close—it might
be that he regarded that as a pitiful and impotent revenge,
which should cause him the next hour to be locked up as a
madman, or put to death as criminal. Horrible as was his
personal aspect, and wild and savage as was his mind, yet,
as I have already said, I felt myself attached to him. I[401]
knew that all the unsocial propensities that animated him,
were the offspring of love, were the sentiments of a lioness
bereaved of her young; and I found an undescribable and
exhaustless pleasure in examining the sublime desolation of
a mighty soul.
Bethlem Gabor had at first regarded me with some degree
of partiality. Kindness in almost all cases begets kindness;
he could not see how much I interested myself about and
how much I courted him, without feeling for me a sentiment
different from that he confessed for other men. I saw
however after some time, with inexpressible grief, that his
regard for me, instead of increasing, suffered perceptible
diminution. Our propensities were opposed to each other.
He rejoiced in disorder and desolation as in his congenial
element; my present pursuit was the restoration of public
order and prosperity. He repeatedly expostulated with me
on this. I had sometimes in our conversations, in the bitterness
of my recollections, exclaimed on myself as the
most unfortunate and most persecuted of men, though
without entering into an explanation of my sufferings. He
reminded me of these exclamations. He reproached me as
a contemptible and pusillanimous wretch, that I did not,
like him, resolve amply and memorably to revenge my own
sufferings upon my species at large. In his estimate, the
poorest and most servile of all maxims was, that of the
author of the christian religion, to repay injury with favour,
and curses with benediction.
I perceived with grief that the kindness towards me that
had been excited in Bethlem Gabor’s mind, rather declined
than augmented; but I was very far from being aware of
the degree in which, as I afterwards found, this sentiment
had relapsed into its opposite. It seems, I inflicted on him
a daily torture by my daily efforts for the dissemination of
happiness. Of these he had not been at first completely
aware. His mind had been too much absorbed in its own
feelings to attend very distinctly to any thing I did, unless
it were done in his presence. But, in proportion as I
soothed his sorrows, and made him my confidant, the film
was removed; and all that he saw had the peculiar misfortune
to excite at once his contempt and his rage. The[402]
finishing stroke that I gave to the animosity which, unknown
to me, was now brooding and engendering in his
breast, consisted in my bestowing an important benefit
upon one, against whom he had entertained a long and
eternal feud.
</div></body></text></TEI>
