<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="46">
CHAPTER XLVI.
Such was the situation of the affair of Pandora, and I daily
looked for the arrival of my Venetian confederate, when
suddenly I remarked an alteration in the carriage of my
beautiful ally. She had hitherto, on all occasions, sought
my conversation; she now appeared sedulously to avoid
me. Her manner had been characterised by the gaiety,
the sprightliness and general good humour, incident to her
age, and congenial to her disposition. She was now melancholy.
Her melancholy assumed a tone correspondent
to the habits of her mind, and was peculiar and individual.
It had an ingenuous and defenceless air, inexpressibly calculated
to excite interest. It seemed to ask, what have I
done to deserve to be melancholy? You felt for her, as
for a spotless lily depressed by the unpitying storm. You
saw, that those enchanting features were never made for a
face of sorrow, and that that bewitching voice ought never
to have been modulated into an expression of heaviness.
I was in the highest degree anxious to learn the cause
of this revolution, and was the farthest in the world from
suspecting its real foundation. I pursued Pandora with
so much importunity, and demanded an interview with such
irresistible earnestness, that she at length consented to grant
it. We met in a remote part of the garden. “Why,
Henry,” said she, “do you thus persecute me? You are
my evil genius, the cause of the greatest calamity that
could ever have overtaken me.”
I started. “For heaven’s sake, beautiful Pandora, what
do you mean?”
“I love the chevalier de Damville. I have loved him
long; he is dearer to me than life; and he has cast me off
for ever!”
“And am I the cause?”
“Yes, you, and you alone. I had for some time observed
a change in his behaviour, that he was uncommonly
grave, serious, and reserved. I endeavoured to soothe him;
I redoubled my blandishments in our next season of unreserved[457]
discourse; I tenderly enquired into the source of
his grief.
“For a long time he resisted my importunity. At
length, ‘Faithless girl,’ said he, ‘have you the cruelty to
ask the meaning of my depression? This is the extremity
of insult. Is it not enough that I know your inconstancy?
Is it not enough that I have found you, like the
rest of your frivolous sex, the mere slave of your sense of
sight, regardless of vows, regardless of an affection which
despised all interests but that of tenderness and love,
caught by the first appearance of something younger, softer,
and more courtly, than I pretend or desire to be? Will
nothing satisfy you but the confession of my unhappiness
from my own mouth? Do you require expostulation, intreaty,
and despair, from your discarded lover, to fill up the
measure of your triumph?’
“For a long time I was totally at a loss to apprehend
my dear chevalier’s meaning.
“‘No,’ continued he, ‘I am not jealous. There is no
temper I hold in such sovereign contempt as jealousy. I
am not of a disposition easily to conceive umbrage, or
lightly to doubt the protestations of the woman I adore. I
have been blind too long. But I see that you are eternally
together. I see that you take advantage of the distance at
which the despotic temper of Nadasti keeps us from each
other, to give all your time to my favoured rival. You
seem never to be happy out of his society. I was first led
to throw off the dulness of my unsuspecting security, by
the general voice of the public. The whole court gives you
to each other. Not a creature it holds, but has discerned
that passion, which you have the insolence to expect to
conceal from me. Since I have been awakened from my
security, I have seen it a thousand times. I have seen
your eyes seek and encounter each other. I have seen
them suddenly lighted up by your interchanging glances.
I have seen the signs of your mutual intelligence. I have
seen with what impatience, the moment you could escape
from the crowded circle, you have joined each other, and
retired together. Ungenerous Pandora!
“‘But do not imagine I will enter the lists with the gaudy[458]
butterfly who has now attracted your favour. I have told
you already that I am not formed for jealousy. I am not
the sort of man you have supposed me to be. I have loved
you much; I have loved you long. But I would tear out
my heart from my manly breast, if I believed it yet retained
an atom of passion for you. I know what it was
I loved; I loved a character of frankness, of ingenuousness,
of simplicity, which I fondly imagined was yours, but
which I now find was the creature of my own fancy.
The Pandora that stands before me; the child of art; the
base wretch that could take advantage of my forbearance in
regard to her uncle, which was adopted purely out of love
to her; the unfeeling coquette that would wish to retain
me in her chains when she had discarded me from her
affections; this creature I never did love, and I never will.
I know how deeply rooted the habit has been in my bosom
of regarding you as the thing you are not; I know how
bitter it is to a temper like mine to detect so unlooked-for
a delusion; I know what it will cost me to cast you off for
ever. But I never yet proposed to myself a conquest over
my own weakness that I did not gain, nor will I now. If
you were to discard this wretched D’Aubigny to-morrow,
if you were convinced of and contrite for your error, I
must ingenuously tell you, no time, no penitence could
restore you to my admiration. I had set up an imaginary
idol in my bosom; but you have convinced me of its
brittleness, and dashed it to pieces.’
“I endeavoured,” continued Pandora, “by every imaginable
protestation to convince my late faithful lover of his
mistake. But it was to no purpose; all I could say only
tended to swell the tide of his fearful resentment.”
“‘Be silent,’ cried he: ‘add no further to the catalogue
of your wanton and causeless delusions. Do not
make me hate too much what I once so blindly and ardently
adored. I feel that I have an enemy within me, that would
fain co-operate with your deceptions and hypocrisy. I
find that man, treacherous to himself, is formed by nature
to be the fool of your artful sex. But I will subdue this
propensity in me, though I die for it. I may be wretched;
but I will not despise myself. Have I not seen your falsehood?[459]
Have not all my senses been witnesses of your
guilt? The miracle is that I could have been duped so
long. I have heard this stripling lover of yours inexhaustible
in your praises, and dwelling upon them with an ardour
that nothing but passion could have inspired. I have
seen, as I have already told you, the intelligence of your
eyes. I have seen those melting glances, I have heard
those tender and familiar tones between you, that bespoke
the most perfect confidence and the most entire mingling of
heart. If I did not believe this, I should believe worse of
you. I should think your heart not merely capricious, but
an absolute prostitute; prepared to bestow upon hundreds
those sweet, those nameless tendernesses of accent and
countenance, which I fondly imagined were reserved for
me alone. I should regard you as the worst and most pernicious
acquisition that could fall to the lot of a man.
‘Go, Pandora,’ added he: ‘my heart is chaste; my
soul is firm. I can no longer be deceived by you; I will
not dispute your charms with the idle boy you have now
thought proper to favour.’ And, saying thus, he burst
from me in an agony of impatience.
“Alas!” continued the sweet and ingenuous Pandora,
“my dear Henry, what shall I do? How shall I remove
the unreasonable imaginations of this noble mind? Bear
me witness, Heaven! nothing could be more innocent than
the correspondence I allowed myself to hold with you. My
adorable Charles was continually calling you brother; I
scarcely ever heard him speak of you by any other appellation.
I regarded Charles as my husband; I already viewed
you in anticipation as the brother of my lord. Excluded
as I was from frequent conversation with him whom I most
loved, I endeavoured to supply the deficiency by an unreserved
communication with you. The extreme resemblance
of your persons increased my gratification. You were his
picture, his speaking image. While I looked at you, I
said, ‘Such once was my Charles, before he was the great
man, the gallant soldier, the accomplished cavalier, the
adored object, that now engrosses my affections.’ Beside, I
knew that Charles loved you as much as he did any man on
earth, and that knowledge made you dear to me. You[460]
were constantly eager to dwell upon and describe his excellences;
could I fail to be pleased with your conversation?
I own that the pleasure I took in it was unbounded, and
the emotions it awakened in my affectionate heart delicious.
But all this, candidly explained, was only an additional
proof of the tenderness and constancy of my earliest attachment.
“And now, ever since the fatal day in which this conversation
passed with my Charles, he is absent from court,
and I know not whither he is gone. He has disdained to
seek any further explanation, nor do I know how to appeal
to his calmer feelings and more deliberate mind. One
thing however I had determined on, and that was, Henry,
strictly to avoid your society.
“I trust, wherever my Charles is, he will hear of this.
I owe this expiation to his agonised feelings, and to the
appearances that in some degree justify his misconstruction.
I will wait patiently, till the simplicity and singleness of
my conduct have cleared my faith. If I should otherwise
have found pleasure and relief in your society, I will make
a merit with myself of sacrificing this to the apprehensive
delicacy of my Charles’s mind. In this single instance
your importunity has prevailed with me to dispense with
my rule: you were not to blame, and I thought upon more
mature reflection that I owed you an explanation. But
henceforth, if you have any kindness for me, or value for
him who has acted and felt towards you like a brother, I
must entreat you to co-operate with me in this, and that,
whether in public or private, we may bestow no notice on
each other, and avoid all opportunities of communication.
To persuade you to this, was indeed a principal inducement
with me so far to deviate from the rule I had laid down to
myself, as to admit this conversation.”
I was extremely affected with the unhappiness of Pandora.
I exerted myself to console her. I promised that
nothing on my part should be wanting to remove every
shadow of doubt that hung upon her fidelity, and I exhorted
her to believe that every thing would infallibly terminate
in the way most honourable and gratifying to herself.
Pandora listened to me, and dried her tears. The conversation[461]
was interesting and soothing to us both; we
regarded it as the last unreserved and sympathetic communication
we should ever have with each other; it insensibly
grew longer and longer, and we knew not how to put
an end to it. We were still in this state of irresolution
when, looking up, I perceived Charles de Damville approaching
from the further end of the walk that led to the alcove.
I would have withdrawn. I was anxious to remove the
unjust suspicion that hung upon his mind; but the instant
that presented to him so strong an apparent confirmation of
them, the instant that by so doing must have worked up his
soul into tumult, did not appear a favourable one for explanation.
To withdraw was impossible. Pandora had
discerned her lover at the same moment with myself. She
was seized with a faintness. She would have sunk to the
ground; but I caught her in my arms. I rested with one
knee on the earth; her head was reclined on my bosom.
Charles approached with a quicker pace.
“Rise,” said he. “This is beyond my hopes. I left Presburg
with the purpose of not revisiting it for years; but,
as I proceeded further and further from a place which had
lately been the centre of my affections, I began to doubt
whether I had not acted with precipitation, and to believe
that there was yet some uncertainty hanging on my fate.
The seemingly earnest protestations of this delusive syren
rung in my ears; mechanically, without any formed resolution,
I changed my course, and returned on my steps.
My doubts are now at an end. I find you taking instant
advantage of my absence to throw yourselves into each
other’s arms. The feelings I so lately uttered in your presence,
Pandora, would have kept you apart, if my feelings
had been in the least sacred in your eyes, if all my surmises
had not been too true.”—He took by the hand the
weeping Pandora, and led her to the seat which a little
before she had quitted.
“Why all this artifice? Why all this deceit? It is said
that we are not masters of our own hearts, and that no
human passion is formed to endure for ever. Influenced
by these maxims, I could have pardoned your inconstancy,
too fair, too fickle Pandora! but why strain every nerve,[462]
to make me believe you still retained a passion you had
discarded, to subject me to the lingering torture of deceit,
instead of communicating to me a truth, agonising indeed
to human frailty, but calculated to inspire fortitude and
decision? This I cannot excuse: this racks me with the
bitterest of disappointments, disappointment in the virtues
I had ascribed to you; and convinces me, that you are
neither worthy of me, nor worthy of happiness.
“And you too, D’Aubigny, you have acted a part in this
unworthy plot, I rescued you from prison, from a dungeon
from which, a few hours before, you had no hope of
coming forth alive. I took you under my protection, when
you had no friend; I placed you next myself; I conceived
for you the affection of a brother; I loved you, next in
degree to the mistress of my soul. In return for all that
I have done, and all that I felt for you, you have with
insidious heart and every base disguise, seduced from me the
woman of my choice. Why not frankly and ingenuously
have demanded her at my hands? The heart is free;
your reciprocal passion, though I might have regretted it,
I should have been unable to blame; it is the cloak that
you have drawn over it, that proves the baseness of its
origin. Do you think I had not the courage cheerfully
and without a murmur to resign to you this illustrious fair
one? I feel that I was worthy to be openly treated. Had
I seen in you a mutual and ingenuous passion, I would not
have been the bar to its just consummation. I would not
have sought the person of a woman, whose heart, in spite
perhaps of her better resolutions, was given to another. I
should loathe myself for ever, were I capable of such a part.
It was the sympathetic sentiment towards me, beating in
accord to the sentiment of my own bosom, that I once saw
in Pandora, and not either her peerless beauties, or the excellences
I imputed to her mind, that formed the master-charm
which fascinated my soul. I feel that I had the
force, in the negation of my own happiness, to have drawn
comfort and compensation from the happiness of two creatures
I so dearly loved, as D’Aubigny and Pandora.
“But this alleviation in the midst of what you have
condemned me to suffer, you have ungenerously denied
me.”——
[463]
I sought to interrupt my son. I could no longer bear to
see him involved in so painful an error, and not exert every
nerve to rescue him from it. But his passions were
wrought higher than mine: he would not suffer me to
speak.
“Be silent, D’Aubigny! I cannot brook to be interrupted
now. My heart is full; and I must have leave to
utter the sentiments that agitate and distend it.”
He advanced towards Pandora. He took hold of her
hand.
“Rise, madam. I shall not long trouble you with the
boisterous impetuousness of my passions. Do not resist me
now!”
She rose, and followed him; her face still covered with
her handkerchief, and drowned in tears. He led her to the
front of the alcove: he motioned me to approach; with
his other hand he took hold of mine. He seemed to lift
Pandora’s hand to his lips, as if to kiss it; with a sudden
start he put it down again; he held it below the level of
his breast.
During this scene, Pandora and myself were speechless.
Most women, in the situation of Pandora, would, I suppose,
have spoken, and have been eager to vindicate themselves
from so groundless an imputation. But what she did was
peculiar to the delicacy and defencelessness of her personal
character. She was overwhelmed, and incapable of effort.
For my own part, my feelings were uncommonly complicated.
My apparent situation was a plain one, the situation
of a youth mistaken by his friend for the seducer of the
mistress of that friend; and had my feelings been merely
relative to this situation, I could undoubtedly have spoken
without embarrassment. But with this were involved the
sentiments originating in my secret character, the sentiments
of a man anxious to benefit, and who had devoted
himself to the interests of another; of a father tremblingly
alive to the happiness of his son, and eager to dive into his
soul, that he might the more sensibly admire his virtues,
and with a more enlightened skill secure his fortune. I was
silent: Charles de Damville proceeded:—
“Thus,” said he, “I join your hands; thus I withdraw[464]
all my claims upon Pandora; thus I remove every impediment
to your wishes. This, Pandora,—this, D’Aubigny,
I was capable of, if you had treated me honourably, and
avowed an honest passion. You do not know Charles de
Damville. You have treated me, as none but the most
groveling soul could deserve to be treated. Had you been
ingenuous, I should have a consolation in what I am doing,
that now I cannot have. I can no longer persuade myself
that I am joining two worthy hearts to each other. I can
no longer relieve the bitterness of my own disappointment,
by the image of your future felicity. May I be mistaken!
May you be truly happy in each other! You cannot be
happy beyond the wishes formed in your favour, by him
who will remember, to the latest hour of his existence, how
much his heart was devoted to you both.”
Saying this, he burst away from us abruptly, and disappeared.
At first, as I listened to the heroic language of
my son, I asked myself whether it were the expression of
a warm heart or a cold one. It costs nothing to a cold
heart to ape the language of heroism, and to pretend to
make the greatest sacrifices, when its constitution has rendered
all effort unnecessary to the feat. But I looked in
the face of Charles, and forgot my doubts. His voice he
had indeed wound up to the tone of his speech; it was a
little tremulous, but in the main firm, serious, deliberate,
and elevated. But his countenance was the picture of distress.
There sat enthroned, defying all banishment and
disguise, the anguish of his soul. His eye was haggard;
his complexion was colourless and wan. He had been absent
several days from Presburg; his appearance told me
that he could scarcely either have eaten or slept during the
period of his absence. He might talk of the generosity
with which he could resign Pandora; I read in his face
what that resignation had cost, and would go on to cost
him. Ingenuous, noble-hearted Charles! I doubted whether,
but for a reverse of the events he apprehended, he
would be able to survive it.
He had no sooner left us, than I applied myself to comfort
Pandora. I swore to her that, in spite of every temporary
cloud, I would yet witness the union of her and her[465]
adored chevalier. I assured her that I would not rest, till
I had forced Damville to hear me, and compelled him to
credit the sincerity of my tale.
How many things were there, that, in the scene which
had just passed, I might have urged in answer to Damville,
but respecting which my situation imposed upon me the
most rigorous silence! I might have said, “You call yourself
my protector, my benefactor, my patron; the real relation
between us is the reverse of the picture you have
drawn. I want not your protection; I am qualified, if I
please, to be a patron to all the world. I am meditating
the most generous things in your behalf: this perfidious
friend, as you deem him, has devoted all his thoughts, and
postponed all his gratifications, that he might prove himself
substantially and in the most important particulars your
friend.”
More than this I might have said. I might have said,
“I am your father. I have no inclinations, no passions contravening
your gratification. I love you with more than
a father’s love; I transfer to you all the affection I entertained
for your peerless, murdered mother! All my study
is your happiness. You are to me the whole world, and
more than the whole world. Extensive and singular as are
my prerogatives, I fold them up; I forget them all; and
think of you alone.”
I cannot give a stronger proof than is contained in what
I have here stated, of the misery of my condition. I was
cheated, as I have once before remarked, with the form of
a man, but had nothing of the substance. I was endowed
with the faculty of speech, but was cut off from its proper
and genuine use. I was utterly alone in the world, separated
by an insurmountable barrier from every being of my
species. No man could understand me; no man could
sympathise with me; no man could form the remotest guess
at what was passing in my breast. I had the use of words;
I could address my fellow-beings; I could enter into dialogue
with them. I could discourse of every indifferent
thing that the universe contained; I could talk of every
thing but my own feelings. This, and not the dungeon of[466]
Bethlem Gabor, is the true solitude. Let no man, after
me, pant for the acquisition of the philosopher’s stone!
Charles de Damville had again left Presburg, the very
instant he quitted the alcove. When I inquired for him
in the palace, I received this afflicting intelligence. I did
not hesitate a moment in resolving that I would pursue
his steps. It was of the utmost consequence that I should
overtake him; all that was most interesting to me hung
upon our interview. The preparations however of my
journey, though followed with ardour, inevitably reduced
me to the being some hours in the rear of my son. I was
continually in his track, but could not come up with him:
to judge from events, you would have supposed that he had
as strong a motive to fly, as I had to pursue. He led me
along the course of the Danube, to the source of that far-famed
and munificent river.
I reached the passage of the Rhine, and was on the point
of crossing into Alsace. But here I lost all notice of Charles;
no enquiry I could make was effectual to procure me the
slightest intelligence. He had not crossed the river; he
had proceeded neither to the right nor the left along its
banks. I was disappointed, mortified, and distressed. What
was I to do next? Could I return to Pandora? What
tale must I relate to this adorable creature, whom I had
urged to depend upon my exertions? Could I leave her
however to the anguish and uncertainty that must follow
upon her hearing no more either from her lover or myself?
I think I never felt more truly depressed than in this
conjuncture. Most amply, most critically did the curse of
the opus magnum attend upon my projects, and render all
my exertions abortive. It was the same, whether my plans
were formed upon a larger or a smaller scale. When I
endeavoured to live in total obscurity in Madrid, when I
undertook to be the steward and the father of the people of
Hungary, and now that, with a chastised ambition I sought,
what is permitted to all other human creatures, to provide
for the honourable settlement of my only son, still, still my
evil genius pursued me, and blasted every concern in which
I presumed to interfere. I had intruded between two faithful
lovers: unfortunate they had been indeed, and considerable[467]
obstacles were interposed to their felicity; but
obstacles are commonly found to yield to firmness and constancy;
and, without my fatal interference, Charles and
Pandora would one day have been happy. If by adverse
fates they had hitherto been kept asunder, still they understood
each other, and rejoiced in their mutual confidence
and attachment. This, the consolation of all their sorrows
and disappointments, it was mine to have destroyed. The
globe, for aught I knew, would speedily be interposed between
them, and here I stood in the middle point, like one
of those invincible repulsive powers hid in the storehouse
of nature, forbidding to them all future retrogression to each
other.
</div></body></text></TEI>
