<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="41">
CHAPTER XLI.
How long I endured this suspension of the vital faculties I
cannot tell. The next impression on my sensorium, subsequent
to those I have described, was a sort of external[414]
twitching and violence that seemed to persecute me. It was
an importunity from which I felt desirous to escape; I
longed to be undisturbed and at rest. The intruder on my
quiet would not leave me; and I at length roused myself,
as if to put away my cause of molestation. My thoughts
were all confounded and obscure; I knew not where, I
could scarcely be said to know who, I was. A little more
effort brought with it a further capacity of perception; I
saw before me, what was now the chief object of my mortal
aversion, the figure of Bethlem Gabor. It was some time
longer, before I became aware that he had been employed
in taking up my apparently lifeless corpse, placing it on a
stone-bench in the side of the cave, and chaining it to the
wall. He observed the motions that indicated in me returning
life: he remarked the stare of my glassy and rayless
eyes; he now spoke with a stern and unpitying voice—“There
is food; there is a light; eat!” Having thus said, he
left me.
What a cruel and remorseless treatment! He cared not
for my life; he disdained to make the slightest exertion to
restore me; he left it to chance whether I should revive or
perish. The figure of a dying man that I presented, did
not make one fibre of his bosom bend or quiver.
I revived; I ate. By degrees I recovered from the
deadly languor which had invaded my senses. In about twelve
hours longer Bethlem Gabor returned with a new supply of
sustenance. I was now strong enough to be able to converse
with him. I heard the heavy sound of opening locks and
removing bolts before he entered, and I summoned my
faculties to expostulate with him.
“Why am I here? What is the meaning of the unworthy
way in which you treat me?”
“It is,”—he regarded me with a truculent aspect, as if
he would pierce through my heart,—“because I hate you!”
“You hate me? Good God! is it possible? What evil
have I done to you? What good have I not done you?
What supplies have I refused you? What occasions have
I neglected of studying your advantage, your interest, and
your honour? If thus your hatred is purchased, how shall
that man demean himself who is to purchase your love?”
[415]
“Oh, think not my hatred idle or capricious! Heaven
knows, I would have refrained from hating you if I had
been able; I struggled against it with all the energies of
my soul. But you have committed towards me the most
mortal offences that man ever endured. There is an antipathy
between your nature and mine, that all the menstruums
in the world could never bring to coalesce.”
“Eternal Providence! and what is the source of this
antipathy?”
“And do you profess ignorance? Have you not gone
on day after day with the full consciousness and will to
torment me? Have I not warned you, and expostulated
with you times without number?”
“Of what have you warned me?”
“I hate mankind. I was not born to hate them. I have
no native obliquity of character. I have no diabolical maliciousness
of constitution. But they have forced me to
hate them, and the debt of abhorrence shall be amply paid.
“I loved as never mortal loved. No human heart was
ever so devoted, and centred, and enveloped in the kindly
affections of family and parentage as mine has been. Was
not my wife, were not my children, murdered? When I
came home to feast my eyes and tranquillise my soul with
the sight of them, did I not find all waste and desolation?
Did I not find their bodies naked, pale, disfigured with
wounds, plunged in blood, and already putrid? This was
the welcome I looked for! This was the object I so
speeded to see! No, never was a moment like that! My
whole nature was changed in an instant. My eyes were
blasted and dried to horn. My blood froze in my well
stored veins. I have no longer delight but in human
misery.
“My revenge is not causeless; this was not the act of
individuals. All men, in the place of these murderers,
would have done as they did. They are in a league together.
Human pity and forbearance never had a harbour
but in my breast; and I have now abjured them. With
something more of inwrought vigour and energy, I will
become like to my brethren. All men are excited by the
same motives, urged by the same temptations, influenced[416]
by the same inducements. Why should I attempt a futile
distinction, when nature had made none? All men bear
the same figure; I cannot view the human figure without
a torture the most dreadful.”
“I always knew,” answered I, “your general hatred of
mankind; but your manners and your behaviour persuaded
me that you exempted me from the general censure.”
“I wished to do so; you made the attempt impossible.
You told me, that you had suffered the same misfortunes
which I had; that you, by the injustice and persecutions
of men, had also lost your wife and your children. I
hailed you as a brother; in my heart I swore to you
eternal friendship; I said, we will carry on this holy warfare
together. We communicated to each other our mutual
sorrows; with you, and you only, I found moments of
consolation.
“Soon I discovered my mistake. Instead of, like me,
seeking occasions of glorious mischief and vengeance, you
took upon yourself to be the benefactor and parent of mankind.
What vocation had you to the task? With the
spirit of a slave who, the more he is beaten, becomes the
more servile and submissive, you remunerated injuries with
benefits. I found that there was not within you one atom
of generous sentiment, one honest glow of fervent indignation.
Chicken-hearted wretch! poor, soulless poltroon!
to say the best of you, to your insensate heart it was the
same whether you were treated with reverence or scorn. I
saw you hunted, hooted at, and pursued by the people you
fed; you held on your course, and fed them still. I was
compelled to witness or to hear of your senseless liberalities
every day I lived. Could I submit to this torment,
and not endeavour to remove it? I hate the man in whom
kindness produces no responsive affection, and injustice no
swell, no glow of resentment. I hated you the more, because,
having suffered what I had suffered, your feelings
and conduct on the occasion have been the reverse of
mine. Your character, I thank God! is of all beings the
most opposite to that of Bethlem Gabor.
“At length you filled up the measure of the various
thwartings with which you daily insulted me. There was[417]
one native of Hungary between whom and me there subsisted
an open and eternal war. I relate in no human ear
the cause of my animosity to that man. Suffice it, that it
was deep, immeasurable, inexpiable. With a refinement of
cruelty and insult difficult to conceive, you chose that man
for one of the objects of your beneficence. Would I consent
to see my name joined in pension list with my mortal
enemy? The injury you inflicted on me would have been
less if you had stabbed me to the heart. Less? That
would have been a blessing. I impose on myself the task
of living for my revenge: but never shall I deem that man
my foe, who should rid me of all this tumult of passions,
and this insupportable load of existence together.
“You have heard my motives. You may wonder at, you
may censure them: but they are human. I have
nothing further to say to you now: you have no need to
recur to expostulation; expostulation never moved the
heart of Bethlem Gabor. Hereafter you shall hear more!”
Thus speaking, he left me; and I must confess, with
whatever disgrace to my sagacity, he opened upon me a
new world. I conceived not, till now, the faintest suspicion
of what had been labouring in his bosom. Amidst
all my experience of the varieties of human character, this
was a species that had never fallen under my observation
before. What a painful and mortifying occurrence is it
in human life, when we have lived with a man from day to
day, when we have conversed with him familiarly, and seen
him in all the changes of circumstance, and when we
flatter ourselves we have penetrated all the recesses of his
heart, suddenly to start upon something portentous that
brooded there, of which to that moment we had not the
lightest suspicion! I am not the only individual to whom
this event has occurred.
In a subsequent visit of Bethlem Gabor to my cell (for
he only attended me with provisions, he would intrust the
secret of my confinement to no other mortal), I intreated
him to inform me with what intention he retained me a
prisoner, and to fix a price on my ransom. To this overture
he appeared to yield some degree of attention. He
made no explicit answer, but asked with an inquisitive and[418]
severe tone, in what manner I imagined I could procure
money in my dungeon?
“Let us agree upon the terms, and set me at large. You
have never found me deceitful, and you shall not find me
deceitful now.”
“Do not hope I will consent to that. I ask you again,
in what manner do you imagine you can procure money in
your dungeon?”
I reflected for a moment. Liberty is ineffably sweet;
and whatever followed, upon the present overture, I was
determined not to neglect the faintest prospect that led to a
termination of my confinement.
“There is,” answered I, “in my mansion at Buda, a
chest which, if it can be brought to me hither, will enable
me to supply your demands. I have the key in my custody,
and no key but my own will unlock the treasure.”
“Give me the key!” replied Bethlem Gabor.
“No,” rejoined I, “it is in my custody; it is not upon
my person: I have taken care of that. No human hand
shall touch it but my own.”
“And how can I cause this chest to be brought to you
without risking a discovery of your situation, or that I had
a concern in your disappearance?”
“Of that,” said I, “judge for yourself. I have made
a proposition to you, and I have done enough. I will have
no share in the detail of its execution.”
“Well,” said Bethlem Gabor, after having ruminated
a moment, “the chest you shall have; I undertake that.
Describe it.”
I described the chest, and its situation in my house,
with a minuteness that made mistake impossible.
After a considerable time it was brought to me. It was too
bulky and ponderous to be introduced into my cell by a single
arm. But Bethlem Gabor, having first caused me unconsciously
to swallow a powerful opiate, found no difficulty,
either to conceal my person in the dark shadows of this ragged
subterranean, or to cause some of his followers to place
the chest within my reach, believing that they placed it in
a vacant apartment. I awoke, and found it at hand. I was
secure that the lock was such a one as could not be forced;[419]
but I examined the different surfaces, to see whether violence
of any other sort had been exercised on it. There were
marks of damage, but not sufficiently unequivocal to enable
me to form a certain judgment on this point. The chest
contained, not gold, but the implements for making and
fashioning gold. Allowing for the distance from which it
was brought, they appeared to be pretty exactly in the state
in which I left them. I had never placed much confidence
in this expedient for softening the heart of Bethlem Gabor;
but I perceived that it would serve at worst to divert my
thoughts, and, by exciting in me some share of expectation,
might call off my attention from the miseries of my present
condition. Embracing the occasions when I was most
secure against the intrusion of my jailor, I provided myself
with the sum that had been previously agreed on between
us. My task being finished, I carefully displayed the produce
of my labour, against the next time Bethlem Gabor
should visit my cell. He viewed it with an air of sullen
and gloomy triumph; he removed it from the cave which
was my habitation, to an apartment of this subterraneous
abode, little distant from my own. When he had concluded
this employment, it seemed to be a just inference,
that he was to give me my liberty. He did no such thing.
Without uttering a word, he closed the door of my cavern,
locked it, and departed.
When Bethlem Gabor next entered my cell, I reproached
him with this, as with the breach of a solemn engagement.
His first answer was an infernal laugh, expressive of
derision, hard-heartedness, and contempt. By and by,
however, he condescended to explain himself more fully.
“I made no engagement,” cried he. “You talked of a
ransom, and I suffered you to talk. I made you no answer;
I gave you no encouragement. Boy, I deceived you not!
No; though my heart pants for vengeance and for misery,
I will never be guilty of treachery; I will break no engagements;
I am a knight and a soldier. You have given
me ten thousand ducats; what are ten thousand ducats to
me? Do you think I am uninformed of your secret? I
opened your chest; I found no gold; its contents were
crucibles, minerals, chemical preparations, and the tools of[420]
an artist. You are possessed of the grand arcanum, the
philosophers stone. If I had a doubt of it before, the
transaction of yesterday converted conjecture into certainty.
And did you suppose, idiot, driveller that you are, that I
would take ten thousand ducats in commutation for wealth
inexhaustible? No; you are my prisoner, and may choose,
in this infallible dilemma, whether you will remain my
slave, to supply me daily resources as I shall daily think
proper to demand, or at once make over to me your whole
mystery, and place me in this respect on a level with
yourself.”
It was now my part to be peremptory and firm.
“I refuse,” said I, “every part of your dilemma, and
all that you can propose to me. Do you talk of my remaining
your slave, to supply you with daily resources?
Do you imagine that, shut up in this dungeon, I will
nevertheless labour for your gratification? Do you believe
that that gift, which I received as the instrument of my
own happiness and the benefit of mankind, shall be made
the pledge of my perpetual imprisonment?
“With regard to imparting to you the secret you suppose
me to possess, I answer without hesitation, that, dearly as
I prize liberty, and numerous as are the motives you may
think I have to prize it, I will not purchase my liberty at
that rate. I would rather spend the days of eternity in
this cavern, than comply with your proposal. The gift of
the philosopher’s stone, the moment a man possesses it,
purifies his mind from sordid and ignoble inducements.
The endowment which raises him so much above his
species, makes him glory in his superiority, and cherish his
innocence. He cannot, if he would, mingle in the low
passions and pursuits of the generality of mankind. For
myself, I value too much the verdict of my own heart, ever
to allow myself to be influenced in the main concerns of
my existence by menaces and compulsion. Beside, this
gift I received for holy and beneficent purposes; to such
it is consecrated; and if I ever impart it, I must select its
depository with all the assiduity and penetration it is practicable
for me to exert. You I will henceforth benefit no
more. You hate me; my disapprobation of you is fixed[421]
and irrevocable. I weep to think how much I have been
deceived in you; I weep to think how many high and
heroic qualities in your breast are now converted into
malignity and venom.—You the possessor of the philosopher’s
stone! You tell me, the sole pursuit of the rest of
your life is revenge and human misery. What an image
do you raise in my mind, if, with such dispositions, you
possessed the means which the acquisition of riches inexhaustible
would confer on you? And do you believe
that any consideration on earth could induce me to realise
such an image?”
“As you please,” replied Bethlem Gabor indignantly.
“I have nothing to propose to you. Think you that,
either as my enemy or my slave, and I hold you for both,
I would descend to negotiate with you? I simply told
you your situation. Yours be the consequences of your
wilfulness and folly!
“One mistake however that I see you make respecting
my purposes, I will remove. You seem to suppose that, if
you were to communicate to me your secret, I would then
set you at liberty. No, by heavens! This cavern is your
abode for ever. You shall never go forth from it alive;
and, when you are dead, here your flesh shall moulder, and
your skeleton shall rest, as long as the world remains.
Look round your walls! Enter fully into possession of
your final home! I know that to keep you here and alive
my prisoner, I must in a certain sense imprison myself.
But at that I do not murmur. I shall have the gratification
of beholding my foe, and seeing him daily wither in
disappointment. You wish to be a father to the human
race; and I shall deem the scope of my misanthropy almost
satisfied, while, in your restraint, I image myself as making
the human race an orphan. Never shall Bethlem Gabor
set at large a man of your unnatural and gall-less disposition,
and your powers for the indulgence of that disposition.
“Sieur de Chatillon, I do not want your secret: it
suffices that I know you possess it. Have I not yourself
in my keeping? It will be more joy to me rudely to issue
my commands, and to see you complying with them in
spite of the most heartfelt reluctance, than to possess the[422]
richest gift on earth in the fullest independence. Think
you Bethlem Gabor incompetent to tame the tenant of this
wretched cavern? Boy, you are my prisoner; you shall be
my creature. I will humble you at my feet, and teach you
to implore my bounty for the most miserable pittance.
Look to it! You know your destiny! Do not provoke my
fury, without a foresight of the consequences!”
I will enter into little further detail of this my wretched
imprisonment in the wilds of Hungary. It was not destitute
of its varieties; and I could, if I pleased, fill a volume
with the artifices and the violence of my gloomy superintendent.
I could fill volumes with the detail of the multiplied
expedients, the furious menaces, the gigantic starts
and rhapsodies of passion, by which he alternately urged
me to compliance and concession. But I will not. I will
bring to an end the history of Bethlem Gabor; and then,
having detailed the surprising events that immediately followed
it, will close the page of St. Leon’s history for ever.
I stood like a rock. Shut out from all other gratifications, I
at least resolved to accumulate in my own person all the energies
of resistance. If I were to unfold the story, I could
command the reader’s astonishment, his admiration; but the
object of these papers is to record, not my merits, but my fate.
How different was my imprisonment in the cavern of the
man-abhorring palatine, from that which I had experienced
in the dungeons of the inquisition! There an inexorable
apathy prevailed: my tyrants were indifferent whether I
died or lived; filled with the sense of their religious elevation,
they held on the even gravity of their course, and
counted my groans and my tears neither for remorse nor
pleasure. The variety I experienced in their dungeons was
the growth of my own thoughts: from without I encountered
no interruption; it was not to be ascribed to those
who held me in durance, if my faculties were not lethargied
into death. Bethlem Gabor possessed no share of their apathy;
his malice was ever alive, his hatred ever ingenious
and new in its devices. He had a purpose to answer,—to
extort from me the supply of his necessities and projects. It
was not so much perhaps that he stood in need of this, as
that he placed a pride in it, and had fiercely resolved to show[423]
me that I was unreservedly his slave. His animosity against
me was so fixed and insatiable, that nothing that was pain
to me was indifferent to him. If at any time he saw me
subsiding into insensibility, he failed not to exert himself to
sting me into life again.
The consequence of this was somewhat different from
what Bethlem Gabor expected. Desponding as I was,
weary of life, and almost finally alienated from the all-coveted
gift of the philosopher’s stone, if he had left me to
myself, I should very probably have sought in insensibility
relief from the torment of my own thoughts. But he
taught me a better lesson. Refusing me the indulgence of
torpor, he obliged me to string myself to resistance. He
gave me a passion; he gave me an object; he gave me comparative
happiness. I was roused to opposition; I was
resolved that, placed, as I seemed to be, at his mercy, I
would yield him no atom of his desires. Thus employed,
I found in my employment pride. Perpetual occasion presented
itself for fortitude; and I gradually ascended to the
sweets of consistency, perseverance, and self-gratulation. I
had for years been inured to satisfy myself with a sparing
stock of pleasures; and I was less at a loss to expand and
ramify those which I now possessed, than almost any other
man would have been in my situation. If my attendant
train of sensations was scanty, Bethlem Gabor took care to
afford them a perpetual supply of food and employment,
and I was comparatively little exposed to the pain of
vacuity. When he saw that I was inflexible, and that he
could no longer gain from me the smallest compliance with
his will, he raged against me with terrifying fury. Was it
a crime in me, that this fury in my tyrant produced the
operation of a sedative and a cordial? There was no malignity
in the joy it gave me. I had much aversion for
Bethlem Gabor, but no hatred. I took no pleasure in his
agonies, because they were agonies. My sympathies towards
him now, I confess, were small; but the joy I felt was
because his fury told me, was the unwilling evidence of my
own value. I left him to assail the mound I opposed to his
desires as he pleased; it remained strong and unaffected
as the sea-beaten promontory.—From the inefficacy of his[424]
efforts, I sometimes took occasion to remonstrate with my
jailor, and demand the restoration of my liberty; but
Bethlem Gabor was not a man whom arguments and expostulations
like these could move. In spite of himself
however I commanded his wonder, if not his esteem. He
regarded the contrast as almost incredible, between the
boy-aspect under which he saw me, and the inflexibility
and resources of my time-instructed mind.
The contentment that I have here described in myself,
was however a creature of the imagination, the forced progeny
of uncommon effort. It was no natural state of the
soul. My mind would sometimes wander beyond the
limits of my cavern, and remember that there were other
persons beside Bethlem Gabor and myself in the world.
I recollected the situation in which I had left my great
project for the reviviscence of Hungary, and rejoiced to
remember that it was already in such forwardness, as, I
hoped, no longer to stand in absolute need of my assistance.
Yet what I had done was but a small portion, a dismembered
branch, of what I had meditated to do, and what
every person of a generous and enterprising mind, who
had been in possession of the philosopher’s stone, would
have designed. Why was I thus stopped in the commencement
of a career so auspiciously begun, and to which
an ardent fancy, would prescribe no limits? Why was
every power of the social constitution, every caprice of the
multitude, every insidious project of the noble, thus instantly
in arms against so liberal and grand an undertaking?
Nor could I help repining at the perverseness of
my fate, which had decreed that I should savour all the
bitterness incidentally resulting from my plan, and not be
permitted so much as to taste the applause and reward that
ought to grow out of its completion. Thousands of men
were at this instant indebted to my generosity and exertions
for every blessing they enjoyed; and I was cast forth
as the refuse of the earth, pining under the alternate succession
of solitude, negligence, and malice, my very existence
and the manner of it unknown, except to one
individual, who had, from the strangest and most unexpected
motives, sworn eternal hostility to me.
[425]
Bethlem Gabor had resolved that, so long as he lived, I
should remain a prisoner: when he died, if he continued
my only jailor, the single individual acquainted with the
place of my confinement, the probable issue was that I
should perish with hunger. Twelve years before, I should
have contemplated this attitude and condition of existence
with indescribable horror. But within that time I had
been better taught. I had received an education, I thank
them, in the dungeons of the Spanish inquisition; and, if
that be properly considered, it will not be wondered at that
I was superior to ordinary terrors. Early in my present
situation the presentiment had suggested itself to me that,
by some striking event, I should be rescued from my
present confinement; and, improbable as the suggestion
was, it made an indelible impression on my mind. I had originated
in, or it had produced, a dream, the scenes of which
had appeared particularly luminous and vivid. I imagined
I saw a knight, cased complete in proof, enter my prison.
A smile of angelic kindness beamed on his countenance.
He embraced me with ardour; he made a sign to me to
follow him. I felt that I had seen him somewhere, that
he had been my intimate friend. Yet all the efforts I made
in sleep, or afterwards when I was awake, were unavailing
to remove the mystery that hung upon his features. I
rose to obey him; the ground trembled under my feet like
an earthquake. Presently, with the incoherency usually
attendant on a dream, the figure changed to that of a female
of unblemished grace and beauty; it unfolded a pair of
radiant wings; we ascended together in the air; I looked
down, and saw the castle of Bethlem Gabor a prey to devouring
flames.—Here ended my dream. I soon felt that
I could reason myself out of all confidence in the presages
of this wild and incongruous vision. But I refused to do
it; my consolations were not so plenteous in this frightful
solitude as that I should willingly part with one so delicious.
Reason, thus applied, I contemplated as an abhorred
intruder. It was, for a long time, part of my
occupation in every day to ruminate on this vision, not
with the sternness of a syllogist, but with the colouring of
a painter, and the rapture of a bard. From thus obstinately[426]
dwelling on it in the day, it happened that it became
again and again and again my vision of the night. Slumbers
like these were truly refreshing, and armed and nerved me
for the contentions of my tyrant. Sacred and adorable
power of fancy, that can thus purify and irradiate the
damps of a dungeon, and extract from midnight glooms
and impervious darkness perceptions more lovely and inspiriting
than noontide splendour!
</div></body></text></TEI>
