<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
CHAPTER XII.
I carried food to the stranger as occasion required in the
course of the day. He seemed indisposed to speak, and we
exchanged scarcely more than two or three words. The
next morning was the implied time to which the question
of his confidence was deferred, and I went to him with the
full resolution of refusing it. Whether it were that he
discerned this resolution in my countenance, or that, in the
interval that elapsed, he had formed a meaner opinion of
my character, and thought me unfit for the purposes he intended
I should answer, certain it is that he anticipated me.
At the same time he magnified the importance of the gifts
he had to communicate. He expressed himself astonished
at the precipitateness of his yesterday’s conduct. It was
not till after much trial and long probation that he could
choose himself a confidant. I was not at present fit for the
character, nor perhaps ever should be. The talent he possessed
was one upon which the fate of nations and of the
human species might be made to depend. God had given
it for the best and highest purposes; and the vessel in
which it was deposited must be purified from the alloy of
human frailty. It might be abused and applied to the
most atrocious designs. It might blind the understanding
of the wisest, and corrupt the integrity of the noblest. It
might overturn kingdoms, and change the whole order of
human society into anarchy and barbarism. It might
render its possessor the universal plague or the universal
tyrant of mankind.
“Go, St. Leon!” added the stranger, “you are not qualified[136]
for so important a trust. You are not yet purged of
imbecility and weakness. Though you have passed through
much, and had considerable experience, you are yet a child.
I had heard your history, and expected to find you a different
man. Go; and learn to know yourself for what you are,
frivolous and insignificant, worthy to have been born a
peasant, and not fitted to adorn the rolls of chivalry, or the
rank to which you were destined!”
There was something so impressive in the rebuke and
contempt of this venerable sage, that made it impossible to
contend with them. Never was there a man more singular,
and in whom were united greater apparent contradictions.
Observe him in a quiet and unanimated moment, you might
almost take him for a common beggar; a poor, miserable
wretch, in whom life lingered, and insensate stupidity
reigned. But when his soul was touched in any of those
points on which it was most alive, he rose at once, and appeared
a giant. His voice was the voice of thunder; and,
rolling in a rich and sublime swell, it arrested and stilled,
while it withered all the nerves of the soul. His eye-beam
sat upon your countenance, and seemed to look through you.
You wished to escape from its penetrating power, but you
had not the strength to move. I began to feel as if it were
some mysterious and superior being in human form, and
not a mortal, with whom I was concerned.
What a strange and contradictory being is man! I had
gone to the summer-house this morning, with a firm resolution
to refuse the gifts and the communication of the
stranger. I felt as if lightened from a burthen which the
whole preceding day had oppressed me, while I formed this
resolution: I was cheerful, and conscious of rectitude and
strength of mind. How cheaply we prize a gift which we
imagine to be already in our power! With what philosophical
indifference do we turn it on every side, depreciate
its worth, magnify its disadvantages, and then pique ourselves
upon the sobriety and justice of the estimate we have
made! Thus it was with me in the present transaction;
but when I had received the check of the stranger, and
saw the proposed benefit removed to a vast and uncertain
distance, then it resumed all its charms; then the contrast[137]
of wealth and poverty flashed full upon my soul. Before,
I had questioned the reality of the stranger’s pretensions,
and considered whether he might not be an artful impostor;
but now all was clearness and certainty: the advantages of
wealth passed in full review before my roused imagination.
I saw horses, palaces, and their furniture; I saw the splendour
of exhibition and the trains of attendants,—objects
which had been for ever dear to my puerile imagination; I
contemplated the honour, love, obedience, troops of friends,
which are so apt to attend upon wealth, when disbursed
with a moderate degree of dignity and munificence. When
I compared this with my present poverty and desertion, the
meanness of our appearance, our daily labours, the danger
that an untoward accident might sink us in the deepest distress,
and the hopelessness that my son or his posterity
should ever rise to that honour and distinction to which they
had once been destined, the effect was too powerful.
Another feeling came still further in aid of this: it was
the humiliating impression which the stranger had left upon
my mind: this seemed to be his great art, if in reality his
conduct is to be imputed to art. There is no enemy to
virtue so fatal as a sense of degradation. Self-applause is
our principal support in every liberal and elevated act of
virtue. If this ally can be turned against us; if we can be
made to ascribe baseness, effeminacy, want of spirit and
adventure, to our virtuous resolutions; we shall then indeed
feel ourselves shaken. This was precisely my situation:
the figure I made in my own eyes was mean; I was impatient
of my degradation; I believed that I had shown
myself uxorious and effeminate, at a time that must have
roused in me the spirit of a man, if there had been a spark
of manly spirit latent in my breast. This impatience co-operated
with the temptations of the stranger, and made me
anxious to possess what he offered to my acceptance.
I reasoned thus with myself: what excites my scruples is
simply the idea of having one single secret from my wife
and family. This scruple is created by the singular and
unprecedented confidence in which we have been accustomed
to live. Other men have their secrets: nor do they
find their domestic tranquillity broken by that circumstance.[138]
The merchant does not call his wife into consultation upon
his ventures; the statesman does not unfold to her his policy
and his projects; the warrior does not take her advice upon
the plan of his campaign; the poet does not concert with
her his flights and his episodes. To other men the domestic
scene is the relaxation of their cares; when they enter it,
they dismiss the business of the day, and call another cause.
I only have concentrated in it the whole of my existence.
By this means I have extinguished in myself the true energy
of the human character. A man can never be respectable
in the eyes of the world or in his own, except so far as he
stands by himself and is truly independent. He may have
friends; he may have domestic connections; but he must
not in these connections lose his individuality. Nothing
truly great was ever achieved, that was not executed or
planned in solitary seclusion.
But if these reasons are sufficient to prove that the plan
I have lately pursued is fundamentally wrong, how much
more will the importance of what is proposed by the stranger
plead my excuse for deviating from it? How bitterly have
I lamented the degradation of my family! Shall I not
seize this opportunity of re-installing them in their hereditary
honours? I deemed the ruin I had brought upon
them irreparable; shall I not embrace the occasion of
atoning for my fault? No man despises wealth, who fully
understands the advantages it confers. Does it not confer the
means of cultivating our powers? Does it not open to us
the career of honour, which is shut against the unknown
and obscure? Does it not conciliate the prepossessions of
mankind, and gain for us an indulgent and liberal construction?
Does it not inspire us with graceful confidence,
and animate us to generous adventure? The poor man is
denied every advantage of education, and wears out his life
in labour and ignorance. From offices of trust, from opportunities
of distinction, he is ignominiously thrust aside;
and though he should sacrifice his life for the public cause,
he dies unhonoured and unknown. If by any accident he
comes into possession of those qualities which, when discerned
and acknowledged, command the applause of mankind,
who will listen to him? His appearance is mean;[139]
and the fastidious auditor turns from him ere half his words
are uttered. He has no equipage and attendants, no one
to blow the trumpet before him and proclaim his rank;
how can he propose any thing that shall be worthy of attention?
Aware of the prepossession of mankind in this
respect, he is alarmed and overwhelmed with confusion
before he opens his lips. Filled with the conscience of his
worth, he anticipates the unmerited contempt that is prepared
to oppress him, and his very heart dies within him.
Add to these circumstances, the constitution of our nature,
the various pleasures of which it is adapted to partake, and
how many of these pleasures it is in the power of wealth to
procure. Yes; an object like this will sufficiently apologise for
me to those for whose sake alone it was estimable in my sight.
It is, indeed, nothing but our poverty and the lowness of
our station that have thus produced in us an habitual and
unreserved communication of sentiments. Wealth would,
to a certain degree, destroy our contact, and take off the
wonder that we had each our thoughts that were not put
into the common stock.
These considerations decided my choice. I was not indeed
without some variations of mind, and some compunction
of heart for the resolution I had espoused. The longer
the stranger remained with me, the more evident it was
that there was something mysterious between us; and the
unreserved affection and union that had lately reigned under
my roof suffered materially the effects of it. The stranger
had been led to my cottage, in the first instance, by the entire
solitude in which it was placed. There was nothing
about which he was so solicitous as concealment; the most
atrocious criminal could not be more alarmed at the idea of
being discovered. I was unable to account for this; but I was
now too anxious for his stay and the promised reward, not
to be alert in gratifying all his wishes. The most inviolable
secrecy, therefore, was enjoined to the whole family; and
the younger branches of it, particularly the little Marguerite,
it was necessary to keep almost immured, to prevent the
danger of their reporting any thing out of the house, that
might be displeasing to the stranger and fatal to my expectations.
Upon the whole my situation was eminently[140]
an uneasy one. No experiment can be more precarious than
that of a half-confidence; and nothing but the sincere affection
that was entertained for me could have rendered it
successful in this instance. My family felt that they were
trusted by me only in points where it was impossible to
avoid it, and that I was not therefore properly entitled to
their co-operation; I was conscious of ingratitude in
making them no return for their fidelity. They kept my
secret because they were solicitous to oblige me, not from
any conviction that they were conferring on me a benefit;
but, on the contrary, suspecting that the object as to which
they were blindly assisting me would prove injurious to
me as well as to themselves.
The health of the stranger visibly declined; but this was
a circumstance which he evidently regarded with complacency.
It was the only source of consolation of which he
appeared susceptible; his mind was torn with painful remembrances,
and agitated with terrible forebodings. He
abhorred solitude, and yet found no consolation in society.
I could not be much with him; my duty to my family,
who were principally supported by my labour, was a call
too imperious to be neglected. Even when I was with him,
he commonly testified no desire for conversation. “Stay
with me,” he was accustomed to say; “give me as much of
your time as you can; but do not talk.” Upon these occasions
he would sit sometimes with his arms folded, and
with the most melancholy expression imaginable. He would
then knit his brows, wring his hands with a sadness that
might have excited pity in the hardest breast, or, with both
hands closed, the one clasping the other, strike himself impatiently
on the forehead. At other times he would rise
from his seat, pace the room with hurried and unquiet
steps, and then again throw himself on his couch in the
greatest agitation. His features were often convulsed with
agony. Often have I wiped away the sweat, which would
suddenly burst out in large drops on his forehead. At
those seasons he would continually mutter words to himself,
the sense of which it was impossible for me to collect. I
could perceive however that he often repeated the names
of Clara!—Henry!—a wife!—a friend! a friend!——and[141]
then he would groan as if his heart were bursting.
Sometimes, in the midst of these recollections, he would
pass the back of his hand over his eyes; and then, looking
at it, shaking his head, and biting his under lip, exclaim
with a piteous accent, “Dry!—dry!—all the moisture of
my frame is perished!” Then, as if recovering himself, he
would cry with a startled and terrified voice, “Who is there?
St. Leon? Come to me! Let me feel that there is a
human being near me! I often call for you; but I find
myself alone, deserted, friendless!—friendless!”
At times when his recollection was more complete, he
would say, “I know I tire you! Why should I tire you?
What gratification can it be to me to occasion emotions of
disgust?” Upon these occasions I endeavoured to soothe
him, and assured him I found pleasure in administering to
his relief. But he replied, “No, no: do not flatter me!
It is long since I have heard the voice of flattery! I never
loved it! No; I know I am precluded from ever exciting
friendship or sympathy! Why am I not dead? Why do I
live, a burthen to myself, useful to none? My secret I
could almost resolve should die with me; but you have
earned, and you shall receive it.”
The stranger was not always in this state of extreme anguish,
nor always indisposed to converse. He had lucid
intervals; and could beguile the sorrow of his heart with
social communication. We sometimes talked of various
sciences and branches of learning; he appeared to be well
informed in them all. His observations were ingenious;
his language copious; his illustrations fanciful and picturesque;
his manner bold and penetrating. It was easy
to observe in him the marks of a vigorous and masculine
genius. Sometimes we discussed the events at that time
going on in the world. When we discoursed of events that
had passed, and persons that had died, more than a century
before, the stranger often spoke of them in a manner as if
he had been an eye-witness, and directly acquainted with
the objects of our discourse. This I ascribed to the vividness
of his conceptions, and the animation of his language.
He however often checked himself in this peculiarity, and
always carefully avoided what could lead to any thing personal[142]
to himself. I described to him the scenes of my youth,
and related my subsequent history; he on his part was
invincibly silent on every circumstance of his country, his
family, and his adventures.
The longer I was acquainted with him, the more my curiosity
grew. I was restless and impatient to learn something
respecting a man who thus wrapped himself up in
mystery and reserve. Often I threw out, as it were, a line
by which to fathom his secret. I talked of various countries,
I mentioned different kinds of calamities and even of crimes,
that by some incidental allusion I might discover at unawares
his country, his connections, or the nature of his
story. When any thing that offered seemed to lead to the
desired point, I doubled my questions, and endeavoured to
construct them with the skill of a crafty litigant in a court
of justice. There were some subjects, the very mention of
which gave him uneasiness, and upon which he immediately
silenced me; but these were not of themselves enough to
afford me a clue, or to furnish materials out of which for
me to construct the history of the stranger. He did not
always perceive the drift of my questions and snares; but,
when he did, he generally became loud, resentful, and
furious. There was nothing else that so completely roused
his indignation.
“St. Leon!” said he to me one day, “silence this inquisitive
temper of yours; check your rash and rude curiosity.
The only secret I have that can be of any importance
to you, you shall one day know. But my country, my
family, my adventures, I have once told you, and I tell
you again, you shall never know. That knowledge can be
of moment to no one, and it shall never be disclosed. When
this heart ceases to beat, that tale shall cease to have a place
on the face of the earth. Why should my distresses and
disgraces be published to any one? Is it not enough that
they have lacerated my bosom, that they have deprived me
of friends, that they have visited me with every adversity
and every anguish, that they have bowed me down to the
earth, that they have made thought, and remembrance, and
life itself, a burthen too heavy to be borne? Your present
injudicious conduct, if persisted in, will have the effect of[143]
driving me from your roof, of turning me once more upon
the world, upon that world that I hate, upon that world
whose bruises and ill treatment I feel in every fibre of my
frame; of exposing me again to fresh persecutions, and
causing me to perish miserably in a dungeon, or die upon
a scaffold. Spare me, my generous host; I know you are
capable of generosity. Indeed I have endured enough to
satiate the rage of malice itself. You see what I suffer from
the rage and tempest of my own thoughts, even without the
assistance of any external foe. Let me die in that degree of
tranquillity I am able to attain. I will not trouble you long.”
At another time he addressed me in a different style.
“You see, St. Leon, that the anguish of mind I endure is
such as is ordinarily attributed to the recollection of great
crimes; and you have very probably conjectured that in my
case it arises from the same source. If you have, I forgive
you; but I assure you that you are mistaken. Take from
yourself that uneasiness, if it has ever visited you; you
are not giving sanctuary to a villain! I am innocent. I
can take no crime to my charge. I have suffered more
almost than man ever suffered; but I have sinned little.
The cause of my uneasiness and prime source of all my
misfortunes, I dare not disclose to you. Be contented with
the plan of my conduct. I have digested my purpose: I
have determined where to speak and where to be silent.”
The more I saw of this man, the more strange and unaccountable
appeared to me every thing that related to him.
Why was he so poor, possessing, as he pretended, inexhaustible
wealth? Why was he unhappy, with so great
talents and genius, and such various information? Why
was he friendless, being, as he solemnly assured me, so perfectly
innocent, and of consequence so respectable? That
he was an impostor, every thing that I saw of him forbade
me to believe. His sorrows were too profound and excruciating,
for it to be possible for me to rank them among
the actions that a man may play. The greatness of his
powers, the dignity of his carriage, the irresistible appearance
of sincerity that sparkled in his eye and modulated
his voice, fully convinced me that he really was what he
pretended to be. I had heard of men who, under the pretence[144]
of alchemy, fastened themselves upon persons possessing
sums of money; and, beguiling them with a delusive
expectation of wealth, reduced them to beggary and ruin.
One such person I had had a brief connection with during
my residence in the Bordelois, though, finding the incident
by no means essential to the progress of my history, I have
passed it over, together with many others, in silence. But
nothing could be more unlike than that man and the person
respecting whom I was now concerned. In reality I possessed
at that time, if I may be allowed to say so, a more
than common insight into the characters of mankind, so as
to be little likely, except under the tyranny of passion, as
in the instance of gaming, to be made the prey of imposition.
I had studied my species as it exhibits itself in history,
and had mixed with it in various scenes and under
dissimilar aspects. I had accordingly, in the transaction I
have just alluded to, soon detected the plans of the villain
who expected to delude me. But what could be the purpose
of the stranger in this respect? The pretended alchemist
in France had obtained a certain sum of money of me,
and demanded more. The stranger never made such a demand
of me; and perfectly knew that, even if I had been
inclined, I was not able to supply him. The alchemist
had amused me with descriptions of various processes for
the transmutation of metals, had exhibited his crucibles and
retorts, and employed a sort of dramatic coup d’œil for the
purpose of awakening my curiosity and stimulating my
passions. The stranger had simply stated, in the plainest
and most direct manner, that it was in his power to enrich
me; but had been silent as to the manner of producing the
wealth he promised, and had abstained from every effort to
intoxicate my mind. I felt therefore in this instance the
effect, that, without being able to solve the difficulties and
contrarieties that hung about him, I yet believed his assertions;
nor was the inscrutability of his history and his motives
capable of shaking my confidence.
One day, during the period of his concealment, certain
officers of the bishop of Constance, accompanied by a foreigner
in a Neapolitan habit, came to my house, and, as
it proved, with the express purpose of searching for the[145]
man who had put himself under my protection. Charles
and myself were at work in the fields within sight of the
lake. Their appearance first caught the attention of Charles
as they approached the shore, and he enquired of me respecting
the habit of the foreigner, which was different from
any he had been accustomed to see. While we were yet
speaking, I observed in them an intention to land within
sight of my cottage. This was an uncommon circumstance;
our privacy was rarely invaded, and we lived almost as
much out of the world as we should have done in the remotest
island of the Atlantic ocean. I reasoned in my own
mind upon their appearance: they had little resemblance to
a party of pleasure; the habit of the officers of justice I
was perfectly acquainted with; and the suspicion of the real
nature of their errand immediately darted on my thoughts.
Without saying a word to Charles on the subject, I hastened
with all the speed I could exert to the apartment of the
stranger, and acquainted him with what I had seen. He
concurred with me in the ideas I had formed, and appeared
much shocked at the intelligence. There was however
no time to be lost; and, after having for a moment given
vent to an anguish which was too powerful to be suppressed,
he withdrew as hastily as he could from the summer-house,
and betook himself to the woods. He recommended to me
to leave him, telling me that he could conceal himself most
effectually alone, and observing that it would be necessary
for me to meet the officers, and endeavour as much as possible
to remove their suspicions.
Accordingly, as soon as he was gone, I threw open the
windows of the summer-house, removed the shutters, and
took from it as effectually as I could all appearance of
having served as a place of concealment. This was a precaution
which the stranger had on a former occasion recommended
to me. It fortunately happened that Julia and
the little Marguerite were gone out together in the fields on
the eastern side of my cottage; otherwise infallibly the child
by her innocent prattle, and perhaps Julia by the apprehensive
sensibility of her temper, would have betrayed our
secret, or at least have suggested to the officers a feeling as
if, by a longer stay and a more diligent search, they might[146]
possibly succeed in the object of their expedition. As it
was, I received them at the door, and learned from their
own mouths the nature of their errand. Of Charles, whom
they had crossed in the fields, they had simply asked whether
they were right as to the name of the person who was proprietor
of the cottage before them. They described to me
with great accuracy the appearance of the stranger, and insisted
that he had been an inhabitant of my cottage. They
told me, they were well informed that the summer-house
in my garden had carefully been shut up for more than a
month past, and that some person had been concealed there.
I was interested in the distress of the stranger; I was impressed
with the dignity of his character; I implicitly confided
in his assertions of innocence, and the unjust persecution
that he suffered; I was not insensible to the proposed
reward, the realising of which probably depended on his
safety. But, most of all, I considered my honour as pledged
for the protection of the man who had thus cast himself
upon my fidelity, and believed that I should be everlastingly
disgraced if he suffered any evil through treachery or neglect
on my part. I therefore answered confidently to
the officers that they were misinformed, and offered to conduct
them over every part of my house and demesnes, that
they might satisfy themselves by inspection that there was
no person concealed any where within my possessions. I
should have been better pleased, openly to have defied their
interrogatories, and to have asked them whether, allowing
their suspicions to be just, they were entitled to believe that
I was such a villain as to betray a man who had thrown
himself upon my generosity? But though this conduct
would have had a greater appearance of gallantry, I believed
it would have less of the reality, as it would have strengthened
their idea of my participation, and increased the danger
of the person I was bound to protect.
They accepted my offer of submitting to their search,
and made a strict examination of every place about my habitation
in which the stranger could be concealed. Disappointed
here, they endeavoured by threats to discover
whether I was able to give them any information. To these
I calmly answered, that they had mistaken my character;[147]
that, though I was a poor man, I had not forgotten that I
was noble; that they were already in possession of my spontaneous
answer to their enquiries; and that, in no case, and
upon no supposition, should tyranny and ill treatment extort
from me what I was not in the first instance disposed
to give. My wife was present during this conversation, and,
I could perceive, felt an alarm for my danger that she would
have been incapable of feeling for a danger to herself.
Though I was extremely anxious that these men should
be disappointed in the object of their expedition, yet I did
not neglect this opportunity of endeavouring to obtain satisfaction
for my own curiosity. I remarked at first that the
Neapolitan was an inquisitor, and this circumstance had
given additional poignancy to the uneasiness of Marguerite.
But the accusations of which the inquisition at this time
took cognisance were so numerous—the ecclesiastical power
continually usurping upon the civil—that I was little assisted
in the judgment I was desirous to frame by any inference to
be deduced from this circumstance. I questioned directly,
with an air as if it were merely in the way of conversation,
what was the crime of the man of whom they were in pursuit?
and what was the cause forcible enough to induce a
Neapolitan inquisitor to follow so decrepit and forlorn an
individual as he described, beyond the Alps, and almost to
the banks of the Danube? To this he answered roughly,
that though he was not able to discover the object of his
search, he was by no means convinced that I was not his
abettor and accomplice; and that as to his crime, that was
not to be named; the welfare of Christendom demanding
that the criminal, and the memory of his offences, should
be buried together. At the same time he warned me to
consider well what I did, before I exposed myself to be
overwhelmed by the vengeance of the court of which he
was a member. To this I answered haughtily, that I had
already condescended to repel his suspicion, and that no
other man than an inquisitor would have had the stupidity
or the audaciousness to question my veracity. I added,
that I was perfectly acquainted with the nature of his court,
which was an object of abhorrence to the whole Christian
world; but that he was mistaken if he supposed that the[148]
detestable nature of its proceedings would enable him to
practise every sort of outrage with impunity. The officers
withdrew into the little inclosure in front of my cottage,
and I overheard them consulting whether, having failed in
their principal object, they should carry me a prisoner
along with them. The firmness of my manner however
had awed them, and the fearlessness I expressed seemed to
them to arise from a consciousness of innocence. They at
length departed as they came.
I watched them from my cottage as they descended to
the shore, and it was with no little pleasure that I perceived
them re-embark, and stand off for the opposite side of the
lake. This spectacle for a time entirely engaged me, and
when I turned from the door I observed that my beloved
Marguerite had been in tears. She endeavoured to hide
this circumstance from my sight. I took her affectionately
by the hand, and, pressing her to my bosom, entreated her
not to make herself uneasy.
“Ah, Reginald!” said she, “how can I avoid being uneasy,
when I see you exposed to this imminent danger? I
thought that, in forfeiting our fortune and our rank, and
retiring to this obscure and sequestered situation, we might
at least promise ourselves the blessing of the poor—oblivion
and security; and that should have consoled me for all I
have lost. Who is this man that is thus mysteriously hidden
among us? What is the guilt from the punishment of
which he thus anxiously withdraws himself? What can
be the nature of your connection with such a man? And
what will be the issue of so perilous an adventure?”
I hesitated. I knew not what to answer to so earnest
an anxiety. I was melted at the distress and the affection
of Marguerite. She saw my embarrassment, and proceeded:—
“Mistake me not, my beloved!” said she. “I have no
desire to pry into what you are willing to conceal. Forgive
the perturbation which has poured itself out in these involuntary
questions. I repose an entire confidence in you.
I would sooner die than interfere with any object you have
at heart. Go on according to the dictates of your own
judgment, undisturbed by me. I will not doubt that you[149]
have sufficient reasons for what you communicate, and what
you suppress. I am grieved indeed at the interruption of
our obscure and unambitious tranquillity; but I had resolved
not to trouble you with my uneasiness and apprehensions.
The incident of this morning has extorted them from me;
but I will behave better in future.”
This scene was extremely distressing to me. My wife
was oppressed with fears, and I had nothing to answer her.
The consolations that rose up in my own mind I was prevented
from communicating. The more generously she
confided in me, the more I felt the ungracious and disagreeable
nature of the concealment I practised. I endeavoured
however to encourage myself with the idea, that the labour
would not be long, and the harvest would prove abundant.
I said in my own mind, The worst is now over; the business
has been commenced; the shock to my own family
has actually occurred; I must go on resolutely, and shut
my eyes to the temporarily displeasing circumstances that
may be connected with the completing my object.
</div></body></text></TEI>
