<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="29">
CHAPTER XXIX.
Nineteen years had now elapsed from the day that had
witnessed my union with Marguerite de Damville. In all
that time I had never been alone. Alone in a certain sense
indeed I had stood at Paris in the period that had led to
my exile, and at Soleure in that which immediately succeeded
it. In each case I was solitary, and my solitude
was unhappy. But my unhappiness was then in a certain
sense spontaneous; my solitude was a luxury in which I
felt myself impelled to indulge. He that has experienced
both, will readily acknowledge the extreme difference between
the misery we embrace and the misery from which
we shrink with abhorrence and loathing. I relinquished
in the former instances my dearest connections, my proper
post and situation; but I felt that I could return to the
one and resume the other at pleasure. I repeat it therefore,
Then I had not been alone, and now I was alone. The
same motive, which in this instance made me cut myself off
from my daughters that I might not be the cause of their
misery, forbad me to be the parent of a future offspring
upon whom I might entail similar misfortune. Tell me[302]
then, was I not alone? I recollected the words of the
stranger, wrung from him by the excess of his misery at the
summer-house of the lake, “Alone—alone!—friendless—friendless!”
I began to penetrate the enigma of his
history.
I fixed my daughters with an ample revenue in the
château of St. Leon; I re-purchased for them all my
paternal property. I waited some time at Montauban to
hear of the event of my project, and their final settlement.
I learned with pleasure that they found their situation
peaceful, easy, and reputable; I enjoined them that they
should speak and think of me as dead. I led them to suppose,
when I left Montauban, that I should set out upon
an extensive tour, that I should traverse the Indus and the
Ganges, and penetrate into the furthest extremities of the
East. How uncommon, how pitiable a fate! I became
prematurely dead to my country and my race, because I
was destined never to die! The first sensation I derived
from their prosperity, as I have already said, was pleasure:
my second was that which the devil might have felt, when
he entered paradise for the seduction of our first parents.
I contemplated with some degree of malignant envy a happiness
of which it was little probable I should ever partake.
Let me not be censured for this: let any man put himself
in my situation, and say, whether the pleasure he feels at
contemplating the separated happiness of those he loves be
not a mingled sensation? With heavy heart I sought again
the road of Madrid.
Though my spirits underwent an extreme depression, I
determined not to desert myself or the advantages I had
purchased at so inestimable a price. I exerted myself to
shake off my lethargy, and rouse the faculties of my soul.
I refused to give way to omens of evil portent, and resolved
to see what might yet be made of my endowments. There
is no misfortune that has not in it some slight mixture of
good. My being now alone, and detached from every relative
tie, left me at liberty to pursue my projects with a
bolder enterprise. The mistake of which I accused myself
in the former instance, was the entering too precipitately
into the exercise of the gifts of the stranger, before I had[303]
properly measured my strength, and investigated the use
and application of my tools. I had suffered sufficiently
from the past uncertainty and irresoluteness of my march.
I determined, as far as human precaution could secure its
ends, to encounter no more misfortunes, to subject myself to
no further miscarriages, but to take care that henceforth the
tide of my pursuits should move smoothly onward. I dedicated
the six months immediately succeeding my separation
from my daughters, to the joint contemplation of morals
and natural philosophy. I was resolved to ascertain the
simplest mode of manufacturing wealth, the wisest methods
for lulling the suspicions and controlling the passions of
mankind, and the true science of the use of riches. Alas!
I had in the sequel frequent occasions to confess, that,
though I had fortuitously entered into possession of the
leading secrets of natural magic, I was a mere tyro in the
science of man, at least in the degree in which the exercise
of these secrets required the possession of it.
Nothing material occurred to interrupt the occupations of
the winter. My apathy—intellectual activity, palsy of
the heart,—went evenly forward. I made no acquaintance;
I was a mere spectator of the busy scenes that passed
around me. I was resolved not to entangle myself with
rashly formed connections; and it will commonly be found,
that he, whose contemplations are principally employed upon
some secret and guarded hoard of reflection, has little propensity
to communicate upon idle and indifferent matters.
A slight incident indeed disturbed me for a few days
during this interval; but it passed away, and for the present
I thought of it no more. During the festival of Christmas
it happened that I felt an inclination to be the spectator
of a celebrated bull-fight, that was exhibited before the emperor
and his court. For the most part I was studious of
privacy; I therefore felt the less scruple in indulging this
unusual caprice. At the commencement of the spectacle,
I was attentive only to the exhibition. I was delighted
with the form and beauty of the animals, with the freedom
and grandeur of their motion, with the terrible energy of
their assault and repulse. It was not long, however, before
my eye was transiently caught by an individual, who sat in[304]
a gallery at no great distance, and who seemed to view me
attentively. His figure bespoke some degree of refinement;
but his eye was fiery, malicious, and savage. Presently
however I turned again towards the area, and thought of
him no more. Some time after by mere accident I looked
towards the same gallery, and observed this man still in an
attitude to examine me. It seemed as if he had not removed
his eyes from me during the whole interval. This
was repeated three or four times. Without knowing why,
I became anxious and uneasy. I had a confused feeling
that I had seen the man before, but whether in France,
Switzerland, or Italy, I could not tell. I experienced that
sort of disagreeable sensation from looking at his face, which
arises in the mind from an association of the object present,
with some mischief or suffering that was contemporary
with its being perceived in a preceding instance. I am now
persuaded that this man was one of the multitude to whom
I had addressed myself from the bench on the hill a short
time before my flight from Pisa, and that he was among
the most eager to interrupt and molest me. But he was
apparently a Spaniard by birth, and I could not at this
time develope the mystery that hung about his features.
Finding that I could neither rid myself of his curious and
watchful observation, nor of the disturbance it gave me, I
withdrew from the gallery where I had hitherto been sitting,
and removed to another gallery on the opposite side of the
area. About half an hour after, looking accidentally round,
I saw this very man at my elbow. I then accosted him
with the enquiry, “Do you know me, sir?” to which he
immediately returned, with a pure Castilian accent, “No,
señor!” He then began to be more reserved in his attention
to me, without however entirely withdrawing it.
As soon as the entertainment was over, I went away, and
saw no more of my Spaniard. I began to tax myself with
pusillanimity in suffering so insignificant an incident to
disturb me. A few days after however I suddenly lighted
upon him in the street. He was talking to three or four
of his countrymen, and in the progress of his discourse
frequently pointed to me. I could now perceive something
particularly hostile and ferocious in his countenance. The[305]
first impulse I felt was, that I would no longer suffer the
unquietness and anxiety the sight of him produced in me,
but would go up to him, and force him to an explanation.
I believed however that, in the temper he indicated, this
could not be done without involving myself in a quarrel;
and I thought it wiser to endeavour to conquer in silence
an unreasonable sensation. I therefore passed on; he immediately
broke from his company, and attempted to follow
me. This I determined not to endure. I laid my hand
on my sword with a peremptory look, and waved to him to
desist. His countenance then assumed an air of diabolical
malignity, he shook his head furiously, and turned down
another street. A strange sort of animosity this, between
two persons utter strangers to each other, and which had
as yet not deigned to express itself by a word! But such
is the world! We hate we know not why. We are ready
to cut each other’s throats, because we do not like the turn
of a feature, or the adjustment of a sword-knot. Prejudice,
party, difference of countries, difference of religions, and a
thousand wild chimeras of fanaticism or superstition, are
continually arming us against a man, of whose virtues and
qualities we are ignorant, and into whose benevolent or evil
intentions we disdain to enquire.
I saw this Spaniard but once more. It was as I was on
the point of entering the house, a part of which I occupied.
I was particularly mortified at this circumstance. It was
plain the man entertained, for whatever reason, a determined
animosity against me; and I was grieved to furnish
him with that advantage for injuring me, which consisted
in being acquainted with the place of my residence. I
would have turned away and gone down the street; but I
had too fully marked my design of entering the house,
before I reconnoitered my enemy. The displeasure I felt
was so unaccountably great, that it was with difficulty my
courage got the better of it; and I determined not to change
the place of my abode. In a short time however, as I have
already said, I thought of this incident no more. That it
should have disturbed and unhinged me, in the degree that
it had done, even for a moment, was a thing I could not
account for. Had the calamities in which the legacy of[306]
the stranger involved me, converted me in so short a time,
from a knight and a soldier, into a character of that morbid
timidity, as to tremble at every shadow? Or, is there in
some human countenances a fascination, a sort of mysterious
sympathy and presentiment, that makes us cower and quail
whenever we meet their eye-beams?
Several weeks now passed away, and I had nearly forgotten
all the circumstances of this seemingly foolish story,
when, in a little excursion I chanced to make from Madrid
to a place about twelve miles distant, I was overtaken upon
the road by a cavalier of respectable appearance, who presently
took occasion to enter into conversation with me. He
explained to me several of the objects that presented themselves
on either side, told the names of the different nobility
and grandees who occupied the villas we saw, and sometimes
entered into the particulars of their history. I at first gave
little encouragement to this communicative traveller; but
there was something so polite in his manner, and intelligent
in his discourse, that I could not prevail upon myself to
treat him with rudeness or disrespect. After having talked
for some time upon indifferent topics, he led to the general
state of literature in Europe. Few subjects could appear
less dangerous than this, as there were few upon which I
felt myself better qualified to converse. By degrees I threw
off some of my original reserve, and I found my companion
well informed and ingenious, lively in his manner, and
pertinent in his remarks.
By this time the unknown, having discovered that I had
only come from Madrid for a day’s relaxation, invited himself
to dine with me at my inn. I departed from my
established system of conduct on this occasion, and admitted
his overture. After dinner he gave me some account of
himself and his family, and seemed to expect from me a
similar explicitness. I was less pleased with him in this
particular, than I had been with his frank and undesigning
conversation on the road. Strictly speaking however the
expectation implied was only a breach of politeness; I had
no reason to suppose that he foresaw it to be particularly
offensive to me. Observing my backwardness, he immediately
changed the subject. Presently he remarked, that[307]
by my physiognomy and accent he perceived I was a
Frenchman, and asked me if I had known Cornelius
Agrippa, who died about twelve years before at Grenoble. I
answered in the negative. The unknown then entered
into a warm eulogium of the talents of Agrippa, inveighed
against the illiberal treatment he had experienced in consequence
of his supposed proficiency in magic, and spoke
with great asperity of the priests and inquisitors who had
been his persecutors. I became attentive, watchful, and
suspicious. He went on to expatiate upon the praises of
the art magic, which nothing, he said, but the jealousy of
churchmen had brought into disrepute; affirmed that it
had been treated with respect, and counted illustrious, by
the ancients, in the instance of Pythagoras, Apollonius
Tyaneus, and others; and expressed a great desire to become
a student of the art himself. This kind of discourse made
me repent that I had been drawn in so far as to sit down
with this unknown, and admit him as my companion of
the day. During the whole time he was the principal
speaker. Sometimes he paused, with a seeming desire to
hear my sentiments. But I had now formed my resolution,
and gave him no encouragement. Presently after I called
for my horse. I should have observed, that his servant
who followed him engaged in conversation with mine, at
the same time that the dialogue began between their masters.
Seeing me about to depart, the unknown motioned as if to
accompany me. Upon this I became serious.
“Señor caballero,” said I, “I have now had the pleasure
of your company to dinner: I am going home, and
have the honour to bid you farewell. It is neither my disposition,
nor the habit of the grave and dignified nation
among whom I at present reside, to form permanent acquaintances
upon casual rencounters: you will not therefore
think I violate the hospitality for which I am indebted
to them, if I intimate to you my desire to return alone.”
All this I said with the grave and formal tone becoming
a Spaniard, and the unknown had nothing to reply. It was
evident however that my dryness chagrined him; and he
even muttered words of resentment between his teeth. I
could observe now a degree of hostility and fury in his[308]
countenance, which remarkably contrasted with the pliancy
and obligingness of his preceding demeanour. I took no
notice however of these circumstances, and rode away. I
have since had sufficient reasons to convince me that these
two persons, whose story, but for that explanation, may appear
to the reader exceedingly frivolous, were the one an
informer, and the other a spy of the holy inquisition. The
man who had seen me at Pisa had his imagination terrified
and his superstition set in arms by all that he had heard of
me in that place; and thought he could not perform a more
meritorious work, than by giving intelligence to the fathers
what sort of person had taken refuge in the metropolis
of this most Catholic kingdom. It was with this view he
had watched me, and at length, by an accident he deemed
peculiarly fortunate, lodged me in my proper habitation.
Having given in his denunciation, my travelling companion
was next fastened on me by the contrivance and zeal of the
fathers inquisitors. He was a familiar of the holy office;
and it is well known that persons of the fairest prospects
and most polite education in Spain are led by their religious
impressions to place a pride in performing menial and even
perfidious offices in the service of the inquisition. The
kind of dishonour I put upon him in parting, though of a
nature he could not openly resent, I fear conspired with his
zeal for God’s and the church’s honour, to induce him to
relate a story concerning me, more modelled by the bitterness
of his personal feelings, than distinguished by a regard
to truth.
Such was the snare, woven and drawing close round me
on all sides for my destruction. I was made uneasy by
the rencounter of the traveller, but by no means aware of
the whole extent of the mischief that impended over me.
When I came to retrace, point by point, the discourse he
had held, I could not conceive that the turn it had taken
originated in accident. I perceived, with no little grief of
heart and concern, that I was known. It was however
necessary that I should reflect maturely upon the conduct
to be pursued by me. I ought not gratuitously to expose
myself to danger. But then, on the other hand, it is a
point of general wisdom, and was particularly incumbent in[309]
my extraordinary circumstances, not to suffer vigilance to
degenerate into restless anxiety. It would be easy for me,
if I were not strictly on my guard, continually to find food
for suspicion, and to surround myself with imaginary plots
and dangers. This was a vice that I was willing enough
to pity in others; but there was no character that I more
cordially disdained for myself. There was none more
pointedly in opposition to that gallant, generous, confiding
spirit, which had distinguished those military heroes of my
native soil, who had been the exclusive object of my earliest
admiration, and whom, in my present dejected and deserted
situation, I still desired to resemble. When I came
to reflect, I easily perceived that this vice was particularly
allied to a life of solitude; and that he who is cut off from
the genuine and happy connections of husband, father, and
friend, is of all men most liable, in their absence, to conjure
up for himself the unnatural intercourses and reciprocations
of hostility. It was thus that I artificially reconciled myself
to my situation, and obstinately closed my eyes upon
those equivocal demonstrations of danger which from time
to time were presented to my view.
</div></body></text></TEI>
