<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAPTER XV.
My mind was occupied in these and similar reveries for
several weeks after the death of the stranger. My wife and
children had hoped, after that event, that I should have
returned to the habits which had pervaded the last six years
of my existence, and which they had felt so eminently productive
of gratification and delight. In this hope they
found themselves deceived. My domestic character was,
for the present at least, wholly destroyed. I had a subject
of contemplation that did not admit of a partaker, and from
this subject I could not withdraw my thoughts, so much as
for an instant. I had no pleasure but in that retirement,
where I could be unseen and unheard by any human eye or
ear. If at any time I was compelled to join the domestic
circle, I despatched the occasion that brought me there as
speedily as possible; and even while I remained in it, was
silent and absent, engrossed with my own contemplations,
and heedless and unobservant of every thing around me.
My abstraction was not however so entire as to prevent
me from sometimes stealing, in a sort of momentary interregnum
of thought, in that pause where the mind rests
upon the chain already passed over, and seems passively to
wait for the sequel, a glance at my family. I looked at
them without knowing what it was that I did, and without
the intention to notice what I saw. Yet, even in this state
of mental abstraction, visible objects will sometimes succeed
in making their impression. I perceived that my wife
and children suffered from my behaviour. I remarked a
general air of disconsolateness, and a mild unexpostulating
submission, to what nevertheless the heart deeply deplored.
They did not presume to interrupt me; they did not by
prying and inquisitive speeches attempt to extort from me
the secret of the alteration they saw; but it was manifest
they conceived some great and radical calamity had poisoned
the heart of our domestic joy.
It was these symptoms thus remarked by me, that first
roused me from the inebriation of my new condition. I[169]
was compelled to suspect that, while I revelled in visions of
future enjoyment, I was inflicting severe and unmerited
pains on those I loved. It was necessary, if I valued their
happiness, that I should descend from the clouds of speculation
and fancy, and enter upon the world of realities.
But here I first found a difficulty to which, during the
reign of my intoxication, I had been utterly insensible. I
was rich; I could raise my family, as far as the power of
money extended,—money, which may in some sense be styled
the empress of the world,—to what heights I pleased. I
had hitherto committed the fault, so common to projectors,
of looking only to ultimate objects and great resting places,
and neglecting to consider the steps between. This was an
omission of high importance. Every thing in the world
is conducted by gradual process. This seems to be the
great principle of harmony in the universe. Nothing is
abrupt; one thing is so blended and softened into another,
that it is impossible to say where the former ends and the
latter begins.
This remark is fully applicable to the situation which was
now before me. Yesterday I was poor; to-day I was possessor
of treasures inexhaustible. How was this alteration
to be announced? To dissipate the revenues of princes,
to purchase immense estates, to launch into costly establishments,
are tasks to which the most vulgar mind is equal.
But no man stands alone in the world, without all trace of
what he has been, and with no one near, that thinks himself
entitled to scrutinise his proceedings and his condition.
Least of all was this my case. I was bound to certain
other persons by the most sacred obligations; I could not
separate myself from them; I could not render myself a
mere enigma in their eyes; though, in the language of the
world, the head of my family, they were my natural censors
and judges. I was accountable to them for my conduct; it
was my duty, paramount to all other duties, to stand as a
fair, upright, and honourable character in their estimation.
If these remarks be true taken in a general view, they
are much more so when applied to my particular case.
There are men who live in the midst of their families like
an eastern despot surrounded with his subjects. They are[170]
something too sacred to be approached; their conduct is not
to be reasoned upon; the amount of their receipts and disbursements
is not to be inspected; their resources are unknown;
no one must say to them, What dost thou? or,
why hast thou thus conducted thyself? Even these persons
will not escape the tax to which all men are liable. They
cannot kill the general spirit of enquiry; the mystery in
which they wrap themselves will often serve as an additional
stimulus; they will finally encounter the judgment and
verdict of all. For myself, I had lived in the midst of my
family upon a system of paternal and amicable commerce.
I had suffered too deeply from a momentary season of
separation and mystery, not to have been induced to renounce
it decisively and for ever.
Firm, however, as I had imagined my renunciation to
have been, I was now thrown back upon what I had most
avoided. I had a secret source of advantage, the effects of
which were to be participated by those I loved, while the
spring was to remain for ever unknown. What I most
sought upon this occasion, was, that my family should
share my good fortune, and at the same time be prevented
from so much as suspecting that there was any thing mysterious
connected with it. To effect this, I presently conceived
that it would be necessary to sacrifice the sudden
and instantaneous prosperity I had proposed to myself, and
introduce the reverse of our condition by slow, and, as far
as possible, insensible degrees.
One thing on which I determined, preparatory to the
other measures I had in view, was to remove from my present
habitation, and take up my residence for a time in the
city of Constance. In the cottage of the mountains it was
impossible to make any material alteration in my establishment.
My property was of the narrowest extent; nor
would it be easily practicable in a country, the inhabitants
of which were accustomed to a humble allotment, considerably
to enlarge it. My house was frugal, if not mean;
and, unless it were first pulled down and built over again,
the idea of introducing servants, equipage, or splendour into
it, would be absurd. My design was not to make a long
abode where I now was; but, as soon as my family should[171]
be sufficiently prepared for the transition, to return to my
native country. I believed in the mean time, that, in the
capital of the bishopric, where my name was scarcely remembered
by a single individual, I should be more at
liberty to proceed as circumstances suggested, than in my
present rural situation, where every neighbour regarded
himself as vested with a sort of inquisitorial power over all
around him.
To account for this measure to my family, I felt it incumbent
on me to confess to them a certain pecuniary acquisition.
The story that most readily suggested itself, was
that of the stranger having left behind him a certain sum
of which he made a donation to me. This, though in the
plain and direct sense of the terms it were false, yet in its
spirit bore a certain resemblance to the truth; and, with
that resemblance, in spite of the rigid adherence to veracity,
that first ornament of a gentleman, that most essential prerequisite
to the regard and affection of others, which I had
hitherto maintained, I was induced to content myself.
What could I do? I was compelled to account for appearances;
I was forbidden by the most solemn injunctions to
unfold the truth. I should indeed have felt little complacence
in the disclosure; I should have been reluctant to
announce a circumstance which, as I began to feel, introduced
a permanent difference and separation between me
and my family.
The sum at which I fixed the legacy of the stranger was
three thousand crowns. I was not inattentive to the future;
I should have been glad, by my present account, to have
furnished a more ample solution for circumstances which
might occur hereafter. But some regard was due to probability.
An unknown, a solitary man, broken with age,
who arrived on foot, and who declined all aid and attendance,
must not be represented as possessing mines of treasure.
It was some time before I could prevail on myself to
break my story to the inhabitants of my cottage. As the
time approached when I was to bid an everlasting farewell
to rural obscurity and a humble station, they seemed to
adorn themselves in new charms. I was like the son of a[172]
king, who had hitherto been told by his attendants that he
was a mere villager, and who, while his youthful imagination
is dazzled by the splendour that awaits him, yet looks
back with a wistful eye upon his mirthful sports, his former
companions, and the simple charms of her who first
obtained his guileless love. I announced my acquisition
and my purpose with a faltering tongue and a beating
heart.
I could perceive that my tale produced few emotions of
pleasure in those who heard it. Julia and her mother,
especially, were warmly attached to their retirement; and
the scenes which had witnessed so many pleasurable incidents
and emotions. Chagrin, in spite of themselves, made
a transient abode upon their countenances; but the unresisting
mildness of the one, and the considerate attachment
of the other, prevented, for the present, their sensations
from breaking out into words. The feelings, however,
that they consigned to silence, did not entirely escape the
notice of the lively little Marguerite. She sympathised
with them, probably without being aware that they were
sad. She came towards me, and, with much anxiety in
her enquiring face, asked why we must go away from the
cottage? If I had got some money I might go to the
town, and buy sweetmeats, and ribands, and new clothes,
and a hundred more pretty things, and bring them home.
For her part, she should be better pleased to put on her
finery, and make her feast in the pretty old summer-house,
now she was again permitted to go and play in it, than in
a palace all stuck over with emeralds and rubies. Her
mother wiped away a tear at the innocent speech of her
darling, kissed her, and bid her go and feed the hen and
her chickens. Charles was the only one in whom I could
observe any pleasure at my intelligence. He was not as
yet skilful enough to calculate the advantages that three
thousand crowns could purchase. But I could see joy
sparkle in his eyes, as I announced my intention of bidding
adieu to retirement, and taking up my rest in the capital of
the district. His veins swelled with the blood of his ancestors;
his mind was inured to the contemplation of their
prowess. Already sixteen years of age, he had secretly[173]
burned to go forth into the world, to behold the manners
of his species, and to establish for himself a claim to some
rank in their estimation. He had pined in thought at the
mediocrity of our circumstances, and the apparent impossibility
of emerging; for he regarded the duty of contributing
his labour to the subsistence of the family, as the first of
all obligations; and the more the bent of his spirit struggled
against it, the more resolutely he set himself to comply.
The rest of the family were no sooner retired, than Marguerite,
finding in what I had just announced to all, an
occasion from the use of which she could not excuse herself,
took this opportunity of unburthening the grief which
had long been accumulating in her mind.
“St. Leon,” said she, “listen kindly to what I am going
to say to you, and assure yourself that I am actuated by
no spleen, resentment, or ill-humour, but by the truest
affection. I perceive I have lost, in your apprehension,
the right of advising you. I am no longer the partner
of your counsels; I am no longer the confident of your
thoughts. You communicate nothing but what you cannot
suppress; and that you communicate to your whole
family assembled. Heaven knows how dear to me is every
individual of that family! but my love for them does not
hide from me what is due to myself. I know that a husband,
who felt as a husband ought, and, give me leave to
say, as I have deserved you should feel towards me, could
not act as you have acted to-night.
“You must excuse my reminding you of some things
which you seem to have forgotten. I would not mention
them, if they had not been forgotten when they ought to
have been remembered. I have lived seventeen years with
you; my whole study had been your advantage and pleasure.
Have you any thing to reproach me with? Point
out to me, if in any thing I could have added to your
pleasure, and have neglected it! What I have done, has not
been the ceremonious discharge of a duty; it has been the
pure emanation of an attachment that knew no bounds. I
have passed with you through good fortune and ill fortune.
When we were rich, I entered with my whole heart into your
pleasures, because they were yours. When we were poor, I[174]
endured every hardship without a murmur; I watched by
you, I consoled you, I reconciled you to yourself. I do
not mean to make a merit of all this: no! Reginald! I
could not have acted otherwise if I would.
“Do me the justice to recollect, that I have not been a
complaining or irritable companion. In all our adversities,
in the loss of fortune, and the bitter consequences of that
loss, I never uttered a reproachful word. What poverty,
sorrow, hunger and famine never extorted from me, you
have at length wrung from my bleeding heart. St. Leon!
I have known your bosom-thoughts. In no former instance
has your affection or your confidence been alienated from
me; and that consoled me for all the rest. But now, for
three months, the case has been entirely altered. You have
during all that time been busy, pensive, and agitated; but
I have been as much a stranger to your meditations as if
I had never been accustomed to be their depository. You
have not scrupled to inflict a wound upon me that no
subsequent change will ever be able to cicatrise. Nor indeed
do I see any likelihood of a change. You announce
our removal to Constance; what we are to do next, with
what views, or for what purpose, I am ignorant.
“I have made my election. My heart is formed for
affection, and must always feel an uneasy void and desolation
without it. If you had thus robbed me of your
attachment in an early period of our intercourse, I know
not upon what extremity my disappointment and anguish
might have driven me. They are harder to bear now;
but I submit. It is too late either for relief or remedy.
What remains of my powers and my strength I owe to my
children. I will not seduce them from their father. They
may be benefited by his purse or his understanding, though,
like me, they should be deprived of his affection. You
may be their friend when I am no more. I feel that this
will not last long. I feel that the main link that bound
me to existence cannot be snapped, and thus snapped by
unkindness worse than death, without promising soon to
put a period to my miseries. I shall be your victim in
death, after having devoted my life to you, in a way in
which few women were ever devoted to their husbands.
[175]
“But this is not what I purposed chiefly to say. This is
what my situation and my feelings have unwillingly wrung
from me. Though you have injured me in the tenderest
point, I still recollect what you were to me. I still feel
deeply interested in your welfare, and the fair fame you are
to transmit to your children. I entreat you then to reflect
deeply, before you proceed further. You seem to me to
stand upon a precipice; nor do the alteration that has taken
place in your manners, and the revolution of your heart,
lead me to augur favourably of the plans you have formed.
What is this stranger? Whence came he? Why did he
hide himself, and why was he pursued by the officers of
justice? Had he no relations? Was his bequest of the
sum he had about him his own act, and who is the witness
to its deliberateness or its freedom? You must not think
that the world is inattentive to the actions of men or their
circumstances; if it were, the fame we prize would be an
empty bauble. No, sir, a fair fame can only be secured by
unequivocal proceedings. What will, what can, be thought
of your giving shelter to an unknown, a man accused of
crimes, a man never beheld even by an individual of your own
family, and upon the strength of whose alleged bequest
you are about to change the whole mode of your life?
“Nor, Reginald, must you think me credulous enough to
imagine that you have now disclosed the whole or the precise
truth. Three thousand crowns is not a sum sufficient
to account for what you propose, for the long agitation of
your thoughts, or for the change of character you have sustained.
You must either be totally deprived of rational
judgment, or there must be something behind, that you
have not communicated. What do you purpose in going
to reside in the midst of a city foreign to the manners of
a Frenchman, distracted with internal broils, and embittered
to us by the recollection of the extremities we personally
suffered in it? Is your ambition sunk so low, that it
can be gratified by such a transition? No; you mean more
than you have announced; you mean something you are
unwilling to declare. Consider that meaning well! Put
me out of the question! I am nothing, and no longer desire
to be any thing. But do not involve yourself in indelible[176]
disgrace, or entail upon your memory the curses of
your children!”
What a distress was mine, who, in return to so generous
and noble an expostulation, could impart no confidence, and
indulge no sincerity! I felt a misery, of which, till this
hour, I had been unable to form a conception. Fool that
I was, I had imagined that, when endowed with the bequests
of the stranger, no further evil could approach me!
I had, in my visionary mood, created castles and palaces,
and expatiated in the most distant futurity! and here I
was, stopped and disappointed at the threshold, in the very
first step of my proceedings. What I could however I
did; I poured forth to Marguerite, not the secrets of my
understanding, but the overpowering emotions of my soul.
“Best, most adorable of women!” cried I, “how you
rend my heart with the nobleness of your remonstrances!
Never was man blessed with a partner so accomplished and
exemplary as I have been! Do you think your merits can
ever be obliterated from my memory? Do you think the
feelings of gratitude and admiration can ever be weakened
in my bosom, or that the strength and singleness of my attachment
can suffer decay? Bear me witness, Heaven! I
know no creature on the face of the earth that can enter
into competition with you; there is not the thing in nature
that I prize in comparison. I love you a thousand times
better than myself, and would die with joy to purchase
your ease and satisfaction. I can never repay the benefits
you have conferred on me; I can never rise to an equality
with you.
“What anguish then do you inflict upon me, when you
talk of becoming the victim of my unkindness? Believe
you I can endure, after having dissipated your patrimony
and drawn you with me into exile, after having experienced
from you a tenderness such as man never in any other instance
obtained from woman, to entertain the idea of embittering
the remainder of your life, and shortening your
existence? I should regard myself as the most execrable of
monsters. I could not live under the recollection of so
unheard-of a guilt. If you would not have me abhor myself
and curse existence, live, confide in me, and be happy!
[177]
“Oh, Marguerite! how wretched and pitiable is my
situation! Make some allowance for me! I have a secret
that I would give worlds to utter, but dare not. Do not
imagine that there is, or can be, any decay in my affection!
Confide in me! Allow to necessity, what never, never
could be the result of choice! In all things else, you shall
know my inmost heart, as you possess the boundless and
unalterable affections of my soul.”
Marguerite was somewhat, but not wholly, soothed by
the earnestness of my protestations. She saw, for the prescience
of the heart is never deceived, that a blow was
given to the entireness of our affection, from which it would
never recover. She felt, for in truth and delicacy of sentiment
she was much my superior, that the reserve, in which
I persisted, and for which I deprecated excuse, might be
sufficiently consistent with a vulgar attachment, but would
totally change the nature of ours. She was aware that it
related to no ordinary point, that it formed the pole-star of
my conduct, that it must present itself afresh from day to
day, and that in its operation it amounted to a divorce of
the heart. She submitted however, and endeavoured to
appear cheerful. Though she felt the worm of sorrow
gnawing her vitals, she was unwilling to occasion me an
uneasiness it was in her power to withhold. She was struck
with the consistency and determination of my resistance,
and expostulated no more.
We went to Constance. We bade adieu to the scene of
a six years’ happiness, such as the earth has seldom witnessed.
I alone had occasioned some imperfection in that
happiness. There were times indeed when, sitting in
affectionate communion with my wife, and surrounded by
my children, my sensations had been as delicious as the
state of human existence ever had to boast. I felt my
heart expand; I was conscious to the unreserved union
that subsisted among us; I felt myself identified with all
that I loved, and all for whom my heart was anxious. But
the curse entailed upon me from the earliest period to
which my memory can reach, operated even in the cottage
of the lake. I was not formed to enjoy a scene of pastoral
simplicity. Ambition still haunted me; an uneasiness,[178]
scarcely defined in its object, from time to time recurred to
my mind. If I thought I wanted nothing for myself, I
deemed a career of honour due to my children. Again,
when I regarded honour as an empty phantom, and persuaded
myself that all conditions of life were intrinsically
equal, I recollected the fearful scene where hunger and destruction
had hung over us in Constance, and in imagination
often pictured to myself that scene as on the point of
being renewed. The sword of the demon, famine, seemed
to my disturbed apprehension to be suspended over us by a
hair. Such had been the draught of bitterness that occasionally
detracted from this most enviable, as in retrospect
I am willing to denominate it, period of my existence.
We quitted our rural retreat, and took up our abode in
a prosperous mercantile city. I hired commodious apartments
in one of the grand squares, not far from the spot
where the fairs are usually held. Undoubtedly there was
nothing in this residence very congenial to the bent of my
disposition, or the projects that fermented in my mind. I
had merely chosen it by way of interval, and to soften the
transition from what I had been, to what I purposed to be.
In the multitude of irresolute thoughts with which I laboured,
the small distance of Constance from the cottage of
the lake, made me feel as if the removal thither was one of
the gentlest and most moderate measures to which I could
have recourse.
I had never been less happy and at peace with myself than
I was now. From general society and the ordinary intercourse
of acquaintance I had long been estranged, and it
was in vain that I endeavoured to return to habits of that
sort. The society which the city of Constance afforded had
few charms for me. It had no pretensions to the politeness,
the elegance, the learning or the genius, an intercourse
with which had once been familiar to me. It scarcely
contained within its walls any but such as were occupied in
merchandise or manufacture. The attention of its inhabitants
were divided between these objects, and the encroachments
which were making upon the ancient religion by the
Confession of Augsburg and the dogmas of Calvin. The
majority of the inhabitants were protestants; and, a few[179]
years before, they had expelled their bishop and the canons
of their cathedral. Having however miscarried in a religious
war into which they had entered, these dignitaries
had been reinstalled in their functions and emoluments.
The situation thus produced was an unnatural one; and a
storm was evidently brewing more violent than any which
the city had yet sustained. The gloomy temper and melancholy
austerity of the reformers were as little congenial to
my temper, as the sordid ignorance and selfishness of the
trading spirit of the community.
I therefore lived in a state of seclusion. I endeavoured
to seek amusement in such novelties and occupations as
might present themselves to a person disengaged from the
general vortex. But, if the distinguished sphere in which
I had once moved disqualified me for taking an interest in
these puerilities, the anticipations in which I indulged of
the future disqualified me still more. My domestic scene
too no longer afforded me the consolation and relief I had
been accustomed to derive from it. Marguerite exerted
herself to appear cheerful and contented; but it was an
exertion. I began to fear that the arrow of disappointment
had indeed struck her to the heart. I was anxiously occupied
in considering what I was to do next. I hoped that
our next step might operate to revive her gaiety, and by
additional splendour amuse her solicitude. I began to fear
that I had taken a wrong method, and entered the career of
a better fortune with too much caution and timidity. At
all events I felt that we no longer lived together as we had
done. There was no more opening of the heart between us,
no more infantine guilelessness and sincerity, no more of
that unapprehensive exposure of every thought of the soul,
that adds the purest zest to the pleasures of domestic life.
We stood in awe of each other; each was to the other in
some degree an intrusive and unwelcome spy upon what
was secretly passing in the mind. There may be persons
who regard this as an evil very capable of being endured;
but they must be such as never knew the domestic joys I
once experienced. The fall from one of these conditions of
life to the other was too bitter.

[180]
</div></body></text></TEI>
