<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="24">
CHAPTER XXIV.
To return to the thread of my narrative, which in stating
these particulars I have in some points anticipated.—I sat
down, as I have already said, in the environs of the city of
Pisa. Marguerite, as well as myself, had a powerful attachment
to the retirement of rural life, and I judged it equally
eligible for the health and intellectual improvement of my
daughters. I accordingly purchased a small domain, delightfully
situated, but of simple appearance, on the banks
of the Arno. Here I proposed to remain during the indisposition
of my wife, which I flattered myself retirement,
tranquillity, attention and kindness, would in no long time
be able to cure. To this object I resolved to devote my
exertions. Well did she merit this return from me, who[255]
had restored me in the guilty ruin of my fortunes, and raised
me from the abyss of insanity. Odious and detestable in
the utmost degree should I have appeared in my own eyes,
if I could have neglected any means I was able to devise, to
heal a mischief of which my own precipitation, selfishness,
and folly were the only causes. Every little, continual,
nameless care I exerted, was as a drop of healing balm to
the burning fever and remorse of my conscience. Nothing
indeed could eradicate my distemper; I felt the ever-living
worm of perpetrated guilt gnawing at my heart. But my
solicitudes for Marguerite, at least during the moments they
were in action, mitigated my anguish; and this transitory
relief, however insignificant it may appear in the eyes of
others, I cherished beyond the wealth of kingdoms.
Marguerite and myself appeared at this time to have
changed characters. She was languid, indisposed in body
and mind, her thoughts gloomy, her hopes blasted, her
wishes bankrupt. Still however she maintained her superiority
to what I had been in a similar condition. She endeavoured
to make the best of what yet remained to her,
though she declined the vain attempt of forgetting what she
had lost. She hung over her daughters with inexpressible
endearment. She consoled them; she reasoned with them;
she endeavoured to steel their minds for whatever ill might
be yet in store. She cultivated their understandings; she
breathed into them mingled sentiments of resignation and
energy. There was in her conversation with them a striking
tone of celestial and divine. Her eloquence was copious;
her manner rich, unaffected, and flowing; her speech simple,
free from exaggeration and turbulence, but mild, affectionate,
and winning. It sank deep into the hearts of her hearers,
and seemed to give a new turn to their tempers and disposition.
It rendered the character of Julia at once more
distinctive, and yet more chastised; it inspired an unwonted
mildness and sensibility to that of Louisa; and rendered
the cadette of the family unusually grave, thoughtful, and
sedate.
But upon me were devolved the more active occupations
of our establishment. Marguerite had formerly been, I was
now, the steward. Every kind of superintendence, from[256]
which the distinction of sex did not unavoidably exclude
me, was resigned to me by the lovely victim of my indiscretions.
Marguerite had been my nurse, I was now ambitious
to be hers. I made myself the schoolmaster of my
children; Marguerite confined her communications to general
topics and the culture of the heart. I initiated them
in music, drawing, geography, several different languages of
Europe, and in every accomplishment that I believed would
be really ornamental or improving to them. I might, it is
true, have hired different masters to instruct them in each
of these branches, and it is not impossible that they might
then have been better taught, though I was myself no incompetent
preceptor. But I had an honest artifice for my
guide in the plan I adopted: I was desirous of removing
out of the sight of my wife every thing that might remind
her of the fatal legacy, the effects of which she was induced
so bitterly to deplore. In some particulars I may affirm of
myself that I was now a better and a kinder husband, than
I had been in the days of our gayest prosperity, or the scene
of our infant loves. I studied with assiduity the temper of
Marguerite; I watched her looks; I endeavoured to anticipate
her every wish. I meditated with care the plan of
life, which her simple and feeling heart, if solely consulted,
would have led her originally to have chosen; and I copied
out in the whole arrangement of our household the idea
painted in my mind. Far from us were now the ostentation
and pomp of the family-château on the banks of the Garonne.
We lived now, not to awaken admiration and envy
in the bosom of guests and spectators: we lived for ourselves.
Every thing was elegant; every thing was tasteful;
but not an article found its place in our residence, that did
not rest its claim to be there upon a plea of usefulness.
Though, by the nature of my situation, I was superior to
all restraint from a consideration of expense, yet our competent
board and orderly habitation approached nearer in
their appearance to the honest plainness of a rustic, than to
the sumptuousness of hereditary nobility. A table set out
with striking propriety and neatness was preferred to the
richness of plate and the splendour of porcelain and lustres.
I was anxious that Marguerite should forget the change of[257]
our situation and the extent of my resources. The objects
of my present pursuit were obscurity and content. That
Marguerite might forget my acquisition, I was studious to
appear to have forgotten it myself. If a stranger had entered
our habitation, and surveyed our economy, he would
have judged that our revenues amounted to a decent competence,
and that we disbursed them with a judicious
discretion. Nothing was to be seen that would have betrayed
the possessor of the powder of projection.
We had no guests. We cultivated no acquaintance.
We were formed to suffice to each other within our little
circle; and, but for the importunate recurrence of disquieting
reflections, we should have done so. To look at
the exterior of our household, it might have been thought
that we had arrived at that sweet forgetfulness of anxious
care, that delicious leisure and unbroken retreat, which
have in all ages been the theme of panegyric to poets and
philosophers. But it was not so. Our reciprocal relations
were changed; and the hope of the house of St. Leon was
no longer in the midst of us, to cheer, to enlighten, and
to warm our bosoms.
A life of leisure is often an active and a busy life. The
grand, I might almost say the single, object of present
attention to me, was the restoration of the health and tranquillity
of Marguerite. For that I watched with unwearied
assiduity. Subordinate to this occupation were the different
arts and accomplishments in which I instructed my
daughters. Yet neither the former nor the latter of these
engagements filled up all the time of a mind so restless
and rapid as mine was. Intervals occurred, in which my
attentions to Marguerite would have been, not soothing,
but troublesome, and in which I could no longer impart a
lesson to my daughters, without relaxing and weakening
the spring of progression in their minds. These intervals
I sometimes dedicated to chemistry and the operations of
natural magic. The more effectually to hide these pursuits
from the eye of Marguerite, I occupied, unknown to her,
a sort of grotto, buried almost from human observation in
a hollow on the banks of the river, and which was connected,
by a winding path and a concealed subterranean[258]
passage, with the garden of my own habitation. The secrets
of the stranger had given me a particular relish for this
kind of pursuit. There are habits of the mind and modes
of occupying the attention, in which, when once we have
engaged, there seems a sort of physical impossibility of
ever withdrawing ourselves. This was my case in the
present instance. My habit was of no long standing. But
no reading of my story, no mere power of language and
words, can enable a bystander to imagine how deep it was
sunk into my heart, how inextricably it was twisted with
all the fibres of my bosom. That he may in some degree
enter into my situation, I entreat the reader to consider
what are the most imperious passions of the human mind.
They have rudely been described to be wealth, power, and
pleasurable sensation. How alluring to every one of us
are the visionary conceptions of the mind respecting these
most potent excitements! But mine were no visions.
I had grasped them in my hand, and known their reality.
I had felt that the wealth of the whole world was at my
disposal, and that I held my life by a tenure independent
and imperial. These are not of the class of conceptions
that fade and perish from the mind. We cannot wake
from them as from a dream, and forget that ever such
things were. They had changed the whole constitution of
my nature. It would have required a miracle, greater
than all the consecrated legends of our church record, to
have restored me to what I formerly was. If then I could
have resolved never henceforth to use the gifts I had
received, I yet firmly believe that I never could have refrained
from the composition and decomposition of simples,
and from experiments on the nature of substances, chemical
and metallic. I was however far from having formed any
such resolution as that I have named. My present forbearance
to bring forth the secret treasure of my powers
was purely an accommodation to the unhappy condition
of my wife; and I felt it as a meritorious exertion thus to
postpone the use of the faculties I possessed. In the mean
time the amusement I sought, that I regarded as properly
and entirely my own, consisted in these experiments.
While I was busied with my crucible, I was able more[259]
vividly to present to myself my seeming superiority to the
rest of my species. I used the employments of my grotto,
as a sort of starting-post from which to set forth in a
series of intoxicating reveries; not to mention that to improve
in the facility of my secret operations might become
a valuable subsidiary to the pursuits of my future life.
I took occasionally as my companion at these periods
the negro of the prison of Constance. I found him sufficiently
adapted for my purpose; his innocence and implicit
obedience to whomever he served, rendering me
secure that he would anticipate nothing, that he would
conjecture nothing, that he would rest in what he saw,
that I might almost exhibit my whole process under his
eye, without once awakening the busy fiend of curiosity in
a mind to which science had never unveiled her charms.
He was formed to be a pure, passive machine in the hands
of his employer, only with this singular difference from
the lifeless machine of the engineer or mechanical inventor,
that he was susceptible of attachment and affection, as well
as of a certain species of contentment and a certain species
of goodness and virtue.
A feature of my individual character which has already
frequently presented itself to the attention of the reader
is the love of admiration and spontaneous deference. I am
at this moment ashamed of my vices and my follies; but
it must be recollected, in the first place, that they are
human, and in the second that I am writing, not their
vindication, but their history. In the midst of my experiments
and chemical lucubrations, I could not help
sometimes ostentatiously exhibiting to Hector the wonders
of my art, and those extraordinary effects which have in
all ages drawn upon the more eminent operators of natural
magic the reproach of being necromancers and conjurers.
This I did, partly perhaps that my attendant might learn
to look up to me with a kind of nameless respect and awe,
but partly also that I might divert myself with the simplicity
of his nature, and the gaping and motionless
astonishment with which he viewed my performances.
If I had not done this, or digressed into idle and ostentatious
experiments, he would otherwise have seen enough,[260]
in the operations in which his assistance, if not absolutely
necessary, was extremely convenient, to have induced a
person, so void of the meanest European information, to
regard me as assisted by and in league with invisible
powers.
The prejudice against me, with which this poor fellow
had been impressed at the commencement of our intercourse
did not long hold out, in his ingenuous mind, against
the more favourable sentiments which my present situation
and mode of living were calculated to inspire. The specimens
he had hitherto seen of European society were of the
most unfavourable kind. His first master was a wretch of
brutal disposition, ferocious and insolent; disdaining to
reason himself, and impatient of remonstrance in others.
This man had exercised the temper of his humble and
honest attendant with every variety of savage caprice; and,
having tired the restlessness of his own gloomy tyranny,
without being able to exhaust the modest and unexampled
patience of his servant, had finished by throwing him into
gaol, upon a wanton and groundless charge of dishonesty.
This, which was intended as a further exercise of tyranny,
deserved to be hailed by the poor sufferer as a period of
jubilee and deliverance. His innocence, as I have already
related, was speedily recognised by his new task-master,
who accordingly exerted himself to obtain justice for the
friendless victim; and from a reputed thief proposed to
elevate him to the rank of a turnkey. Hector had neither
kindred nor patron to assist him; the outcast of a gaol, he
must again have entered the world with a blasted character.
Thus circumstanced, and influenced beside by gratitude to
the unlooked-for liberality of his deliverer, he willingly accepted
the situation proposed to him. With his new master,
who, not less unprincipled, was less tyrannical than his
predecessor, the humbleness of his hopes taught him to be
contented. Yet in the bosom of the gaoler all his fidelity
and regard could not enable him to detect one positive
virtue; and, within the walls of the prison, there had
existed nothing that could by any possibility cherish and
refresh the human heart.
The scene presented to Hector’s observation in our little[261]
retreat, on the banks of the Arno, was of a very different
nature. To his frank and affectionate spirit, it appeared a
perfect paradise. He had yet scarcely been acquainted with
any but the refuse of mankind, from the infection of whose
vices his unapprehensive and invincible simplicity had been
his only safeguard; and he was now suddenly introduced
to the presence and intercourse of the most perfect of her
sex. He loved her as a benefactor, and he worshipped her
as a god. There is no receipt for begetting affection in
others, so infallible as a warm and susceptible heart. Hector
accordingly soon became in a remarkable degree the
favourite of my daughters. His temper was naturally
cheerful and gay; and, warmed by their encouragement, it
became a thousand times more so. When he had completed
the occupations of the day, the lightness of his spirit would
prompt him to sing and dance for ever. He exhibited the
whole circle of his sportive games for their amusement.
The infantine innocence of his understanding remarkably
adapted him to be the butt of their little waggeries and
mischiefs. Whatever tricks were played upon him, were
however tempered by the forbearance and regard his worth
demanded; while the obstreperous cheerfulness with which
he would second their mirth, when most ignorant of its
occasion, gave uncommon zest to the amusement, and furnished
eternal provocation to the prolonging and varying its
features.
Let not the fastidious reader complain of the inconsistency
of this part of my picture, or censure the levity of my
daughters. I am not writing a tragedy, but a history.
Sad grief and melancholy cannot, and ought not, for ever
to reign in the human face or the human heart. No daughters
ever loved a mother more entirely, more fervently, than
Marguerite was loved by her children. They were unwearied
in their attention to her: often was their pillow watered
with tears, occasioned by the sad presentiment of the
loss they were destined to sustain. But the human mind,
particularly in the season of youth, has an unconquerable
principle of elasticity in its frame. The bow cannot be kept
for ever on the stretch; and, when the whole soul appears
to be bent down by calamity to the grave, it will often surprisingly[262]
recover its vigour and renew its strength. The
ingenuous nature of these poor girls led them indeed occasionally
to reproach themselves with these moments of
cheerfulness as with a crime. But it was no crime. None
but the uncharitably rigorous and morose will charge it
upon them as a crime. It interfered with no duty; it
diminished no affection; it had no tendency to harden their
hearts. It was a tax they paid to the imperfectness of our
nature; it was a tribute of gratitude to that God who,
while he deals out to us the most terrible calamities, fails
not to mix with the copious draught some solitary drops of
beneficence. Julia alone, whose temper was constitutionally
serious and soft, entered little into these sports, of
which her youngest sister was the eternal leader and untired
partaker. Yet even upon the grave countenance of Julia
they would sometimes provoke an unwilling smile, which
upon her countenance sat with uncommon lustre.
The hilarity and loveliness which Hector found in the
midst of my family instigated and increased the attachment
he began to feel for myself. He could not believe
that the father of such daughters, and the chosen husband
of such a consort, could be destitute of a title to be loved.
He reasoned in his own way upon the attempt I had made
to corrupt his fidelity, an attack which he never thoroughly
digested. I have reason to believe that his attendance upon
my chemical processes, and the wonders I occasionally
showed to excite his astonishment, did not tend to elevate
me in his good opinion. But he could not avoid witnessing
in me many of the virtues of a good husband and
a good father, and these, so new to his observation, strongly
impressed him in my favour. The regularity of my habits
and the mildness of my carriage were also calculated to win
his affection and esteem. Never had the poor fellow’s affections
been so forcibly called out as they were in his new
situation; and he would cheerfully have stretched out his
neck to the assassin’s knife, to have warded off impending
evil from the meanest of us.
Prosperity and ease have often been found the parents of
wishes and inclinations unfelt before. Adversity is the
season of sober thought, calls home the erratic mind, and[263]
teaches us to be cheaply satisfied. But the man who has
many gratifications is apt to wander in imagination from
daily and familiar joys, and confidently to reach after things
yet untried. Such was the situation of Hector: Hector
was in love. Our sweet and simple mansion was distant
scarcely more than two hundred yards from a characteristic
Italian village. The maid of a little albergo in this place
had caught his inexperienced heart. He had been invited
by some peasants to a moonlight festivity on the lawn of
the albergo; and, though I should have been better pleased
that my servants should decline this sort of amusement, I
could not have the heart to deny him. It was, so far as I
knew, the first and the last time that Hector had ever resorted
to it. But I was deceived. Hector had proved the
gayest and most amusing of the whole circle. His cheerfulness
was inexhaustible, and his mirth in the utmost degree
harmless and good humoured. He had played a
thousand antics, and danced with an agility that knew no
end. In a word, the accomplishments of Hector, in spite
of the jetty hue that stained his face, had won the heart,
or roused the coquetry, of the plump and rosy bar-maid.
The overtures she made and the lures she threw out were
too glaring to escape the notice even of the modest Hector.
He felt himself flattered, such is human nature, at suddenly
becoming an object of admiration and preference to
a woman, whom his imagination, stimulated by her visible
partiality, attired in a hundred charms. He owned himself
hers, in all fair and honest fealty, to the world’s end.
Love taught Hector a lesson which he had never learned
before. In nature he was frank, and, as far as fidelity to
his master permitted it, wore his heart as naked as his face.
Love taught him dissimulation. A vulgar footman or
clown is as forward as the most empty beau, in boasting of
the triumphs he has gained over the female heart, and in
sacrificing the reputation of those who have loved him at
the shrine of his vanity. Not such was Hector. He shut
Up his new sensations and reveries as a sacred deposit in his
bosom. Nature worked within him, and he would have
been ashamed to speak, and distressed to hear, of emotions,
now felt, till now never experienced. His artless and ingenuous[264]
temper in this one particular assumed the guise of
cunning. Never did he tell his love in the ear of any indifferent
auditor; assiduously did he avoid pronouncing
even the name of her to whom he was attached. In any
other case he would have announced to me his inclinations,
and previously demanded my leave of absence for his excursions.
But love seemed to him imperiously to command
privacy, and he employed every imaginable precaution to
prevent me and all human beings from knowing whither he
went, or that he was absent at all.
In one of his visits to his fair donzella, he happened incautiously
to drop some very remote hint of the scenes in
which he had just been engaged with me in my secret
grotto. The curiosity of the girl was strongly roused; she
questioned him further. He started, and was terrified to
recollect what he had said. I had strictly enjoined him
secrecy towards every member of my family: my precaution
had extended no further; for, as I have said, I
scarcely knew that he had the most casual intercourse with
any person beyond my own roof. But Hector naturally
dreaded that what I was so earnest to conceal from every
one in my house he would be highly to blame to communicate
to a stranger. He therefore peremptorily refused,
and with many signs of distress, to say another word on the
subject.
The donzella, piqued at his resistance, had recourse to
female arts. She was cruel; she uttered words of sharp
displeasure and disdain; she knew that a person who refused
her such a trifle could not have an atom of regard for
her; she commanded him never to see her more. Unsuccessful
in these expedients, she had recourse to expedients
of a different sort. She wept; she called him base, false-hearted
and unkind; she saw he was determined to be the
death of her; she was seized with strong fits of sobbing
and hysterical affection. In the midst of all this he was
as unmoved as a rock of marble. He interpreted every
thing that passed in its most literal form; he felt more
severely her unkindness, and sympathised more truly in her
distress, than perhaps any human creature would have done.
But no further could she gain upon him. The confidence[265]
of his master was in question, and he would sooner have
died upon the rack, than run the slightest risk of betraying
it.
From these arts she descended to arts more congenial to
the habits of her life. She summoned all her skill to perplex
him with cunning and insidious questions. From her
questions he ought to have fled; but of this Hector was incapable.
He was distressed by her severity, he grieved for
the unintentional pain he had caused her. All these circumstances
melted his heart; and he could not resolve upon
any thing that was not considerate and respectful towards her.
As the framing of artful questions was the strong-hold of
the donzella, and she might have challenged in this article
the most hoary practitioner of the quibbling bar, so it was
exactly the weakest side upon which poor Hector could be
attacked. His simplicity yielded him up a defenceless prey
to the assailant; least of all human undertakings was he capable
of detecting the various faces of a doubtful question,
and of guarding himself against the traps of an insidious
foe. It was not till the fourth interview from Hector’s original
hint, that the donzella had recourse to this species of
attack; and she did not withdraw her forces, till she had
extorted from him all he knew.
When Hector found that all his guards were baffled and
put to flight, he had then recourse to the only expedient
that remained, conjuring her by every thing sacred and
every thing tremendous, not to betray a trust she had so
ungenerously obtained from him. She readily promised
every thing he desired. Soothed by her compliance, he
determined not to mention to me the lapse of which he had
been guilty. It would in his opinion have been little less
than treason, to suspect his Dulcinea of indiscretion or
frailty. In the breast of this miracle of nature was not his
loyalty as secure as it could be even in his own? Why
then should he betray the secret of his love, which had
never yet been confided even to the senseless air? Why
should he subject himself to the inconceivable anguish and
confusion, of owning, where my interests, or where my
wishes were concerned, that he had been found tripping
and imperfect? Why should he inflict a pain, or cause[266]
in me a fear, which he knew, and he only could know,
was groundless? Thus it happened that I had one more
confident of what I purposed should be secret, than I was
myself in the smallest degree advertised of.
The consequences of this indiscretion of my servant were
not slow in rendering themselves visible. The donzella
was by no means so scrupulous or delicate in her sentiments,
as my humble, but faithful, attendant. As she had
given her company to Hector, she had had an opportunity
of observing in him such integrity and goodness of heart,
as could not fail to extort the esteem of any human being.
She really honoured him; she was unwilling to give him
any cause of uneasiness. But she had another lover; perhaps
she had more. The laws of chastity she regarded as
prejudices, and believed they were never formed for persons
in her situation in society. She was of opinion that the
more lovers she had, provided she satisfied them all, the
more completely did she improve the talents with which
Heaven had endowed her. Few women have any secrets
for the man they admit to their embraces. In an hour of
amorous dalliance she communicated to Agostino, the ostler,
all that she knew of the conjurations and spells of Monsieur
Boismorand, such was the name I had assumed upon my
entrance into Italy. Her communication was probably attended
with cautions, imitated from those with which Hector
had so industriously loaded the donzella in the preceding
example. Perhaps the illustrissimo Agostino had another
mistress, with whom he thought it would be unjust to
practise greater reserves than the donzella had done with
him. Be that as it will, the rumours which were whispered
to my prejudice speedily got air; and, it may be, were repeated
with the greater avidity, on account of the mystery
that attended them, and the injunctions of secrecy with
which they were accompanied.

[267]
</div></body></text></TEI>
