<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><fileDesc><titleStmt><title>St. Leon: A Tale of the Sixteenth Century</title><author>Godwin, William (1756-1836)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>Richard Phillips</publisher><pubPlace>London</pubPlace><date>1799</date></publicationStmt><sourceDesc><p>Produced from a Project Gutenberg HTML source using gutenberg-text-splitter.</p></sourceDesc></fileDesc></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="21">
CHAPTER XXI.
The appearance of wealth that accompanied me had by
this time made its impression upon my keepers; and one
of them now informed me, that monsieur Monluc, an agent
of the court of France, who was making a tour of several
of the German states by order of his sovereign, had arrived
the night before at the city of Constance. There was no
representative of my country regularly resident here, and
I immediately felt the presence of Monluc to be the most
fortunate event that could have occurred for effecting my
honourable deliverance. Selfishness and avarice, it may be
thought, would rather have impelled the persons who had
me in custody to conceal from me a circumstance calculated
to deprive them of an advantageous prey. But in
those groveling souls from whom riches never fail to extort
homage, however strange it may seem, the homage often
appears disinterested. They pay it by a sort of irresistible
instinct; and, admiring what they covet, at an awful distance,
with difficulty assume the courage to pollute their
worship with ideas of calculation and gain.
I immediately addressed a memorial to this gallant soldier,
with whose person indeed I was unacquainted, but
the fame of whose spirit and enterprise had not failed to
have reached me. I represented to him that I was a
Frenchman of family and distinction; that I had been
seized upon and was retained in prison by the magistrates
here, without accuser or the hope of a trial; that I had not
been guilty of the shadow of a crime; and that I knew the
benignity and courage of my sovereign would never permit
a subject of France to languish under calumny and oppression
in a foreign country. I added, that he would do an
acceptable service to king Francis, to whom I had the honour
to be known, by interfering in my favour; and therefore
entreated him to obtain for me immediate justice and
deliverance. Monluc returned me an answer by the bearer
of my memorial, assuring me that he would lose no time
in enquiring into the merits of my case, and that I might[224]
depend upon receiving every assistance from him that a
man of honour could desire.
The warmth and frankness of this answer filled me with
hope, for there was no deliverance from my present situation
that I could contemplate with satisfaction, but such
a one as should be accompanied with reparation and éclat.
Three days however elapsed before I heard again from the
French envoy. On the morning of the fourth he announced
his intention of visiting me; and, about an hour after,
arrived at the prison. His appearance was striking. He
was tall, slender, and well made, with a freedom of carriage,
not derived from the polish of courts, but which appeared
to flow from the manliness and active energies of
his mind. His hair and complexion were dark; the former,
though he was still young, rather scantily shaded a high
and ample forehead. His features were expressive of the
sanguine and adust temper of his mind; and, though his
eye was animated, his countenance, as he entered, struck
me as particularly solemn.
“You are the count de St. Leon?” said he.
“I am.”
“You sent me a memorial a few days ago complaining
of the tribunal of this city: I am afraid, sir, I can do nothing
for you.”
My countenance fell as he spoke; I gasped for breath.
I had conceived a most favourable anticipation as he entered,
and my disappointment was particularly cruel. I
had said in my heart, This is the very man to rescue my
injured fame.
“I see, sir, you are disappointed,” resumed he. “I
have not given up the affair: if I had, this visit, which I
design as a mark of attention, would be an insult. The
moment I received your memorial, I paid the utmost regard
to it. If the affair had been as you represented it, I
know I could not do any thing more acceptable to my sovereign
than interfere in your behalf. I have spent the
whole interval in investigating the case. I have seen the
magistrate who committed you; I have visited the spot
where your crime is alleged to have been perpetrated; I
have had an interview with your wife.”
[225]
“Well, sir,” cried I, alarmed and impatient—“well,
sir, and the result?”
“Appearances are uncommonly strong against you: they
can scarcely he stronger. But you have a right to be heard;
it is for the sake of discharging that last act of justice that
you see me this morning.”
“Great God!” exclaimed I, overwhelmed with chagrin,
“is if possible that my countryman, the man to whom I
was proud and happy to appeal, the gallant Monluc, should
believe me a murderer? I swear by every thing that is
sacred, by the blood of him that died for me on the cross,
and by my eternal salvation, that I am as innocent as the
child unborn!”
“I am glad to hear you express yourself with this emphasis
and fervour. I cannot but say that to my own
feelings it has great weight. But I must not suffer myself
as a man, and still less in the public capacity in which I
stand, to be overcome and confounded by your asseverations.
There is a connected and most unfavourable story against
you: this it is incumbent on you to clear up.”
“And you say, you have seen my wife?” I was distracted
and overwhelmed by Monluc’s way of putting the
question. I was divided between my anxiety to be justified,
and the solemn mystery of the affair to which his enquiries
led; and I probably spoke thus from an unconscious desire
to gain time.
“Yes, that is another presumption in your favour. Madame
de St. Leon is perhaps the most striking and extraordinary
woman I ever saw. Of the husband of such a woman,
especially when he appears to be the object of her attachment,
I should be always inclined to think well. Madame
de St. Leon pleaded for you with earnestness and affection.
But, amidst all her ardour, I could perceive that she felt
there was something mysterious and unpleasant in the affair,
that she was unable to develope.”
As Monluc spoke, I saw that I had failed in one of the
main anchors of my hope. I thought that no one could
have talked with my beloved Marguerite, and have left her
with the opinion that I was a murderer. How did this happen?
Was she lukewarm and unfaithful in my vindication?
[226]
“What she,” continued my countryman, “I could see,
was not only unable to explain, but did not fully understand,
it is you alone can clear; the concealment of the
stranger, his disappearance, what became of the body, and
your own sudden transition from poverty to wealth.”
I was by this time fully sensible of the nature of my
situation. I summoned my fortitude; I felt that I had no
longer any hope but in the dignity of innocence.
“You call on me for explanation,” replied I. “Can
you not conceive, gallant Monluc, that I may be able to
resolve your doubts, and yet that I will not? Explanation
is not the business of a man of honour. He cannot stoop
to it. He will win the applause and approbation of mankind,
if won, in silence. He will hold on the even course
of a generous spirit, and turn neither to the right nor to the
left, to court the suffrage, or deprecate the condemnation of
a giddy multitude. Such, my brave countryman, have been
the maxims of my past life; such will be the maxims of
my future.”
“I admire,” answered Monluc, “at least the gallantry
of these sentiments, though I may be inclined to doubt their
prudence. But, if such is your determination, permit me
to say, you have no concern with me. He who resolutely
withholds explanation, must arm himself with patience, and
either wait the operation of time, or rest satisfied with the
consciousness of his innocence.”
“And is that all? Will there not be some noble spirits,
who, separating themselves from the herd, will judge of
him by what they feel in their own breasts, and be drawn
to him with an irresistible impulse? Was it not natural
that I should expect Monluc to be one of these? It would
be hard indeed, if he who disdains to temporise with
popularity, and to vindicate himself from the ungenerous
constructions of sordid minds, should not by that very proceeding
secure the friendship and sympathy of those, whose
friendship it will be most grateful to him to possess.”
“The friends of an innocent man, whom a combination
of circumstances has exposed to the most painful suspicions,
must always be few. He can scarcely expect the acquittal
and sympathy of a stranger. I must know, I must have[227]
felt and observed in a man a thousand virtues, before I can
be entitled to treat accumulated presumptions against him
as nothing.”
“And thus then are to end my hopes in Monluc? He
does not feel that I am innocent? He does not recognise
in me the countenance, the voice, the turn of thought, of a
brother, a man no less incapable than himself of every thing
disgraceful and ignominious? Be it so! I will, as you advise
me, rest upon the consciousness of my innocence. A
Frenchman, the descendant of illustrious ancestors, long an
exile, long the victim of adversity, but at all times conscious
of the purity of my sentiments and the integrity of my
conduct, I will not suffer myself to be overwhelmed with
this last desertion, this ultimate refusal of justice!”
“Count de St. Leon! your appeal is full of energy. In
whatever way I decide, it will leave an unpleasant sensation
in my breast. Let us suppose that, as a private man,
I could take you to my arms, and dismiss every unfavourable
appearance from my mind. You must remember that
I am here in a public character, and that only in a public
character am I capable of affording you assistance. Thus
situated, I am bound to resist the impulses of a romantic
and irregular confidence, and to do nothing of which I shall
not be able to render a clear and intelligible account.
“Let us not part thus! It is not the vindication of
your character to the world, with which we are at present
concerned. It is only necessary that you should furnish a
sufficient ground to justify me to myself for interfering in
your behalf. Explain to me the particulars of your case,
in confidence if you will, but fully and without reserve. I
will not abuse your confidence. I will make no use of your
communication, but such as you shall yourself approve.
Only enable me to have a reason for acting, that is not
merely capable of being felt, but that I may know is in its
own nature capable of being stated to another. It is upon
me that you call to take certain measures; you must enable
me to judge of their propriety.
“You are mistaken when you suppose the appearances
against you to be slight. It is not a slight circumstance,
that you profess to be ignorant of, or have refused to disclose,[228]
the country, the connections, and even the name of
the stranger whom you so anxiously concealed. The disappearance
of his body is still more extraordinary. What
intelligible motive, except a guilty one, can I assign for
that? But your sudden wealth immediately after this disappearance,
is especially material. It is a broad and glaring
fact, that men cannot shut their eyes on, if they would.
The chain and combination of events, that proceeds systematically
from link to link, is the criterion of guilt and
the protector of reputation. Your case, as it now stands,
is scarcely to be termed equivocal: upon the supposition of
your criminality all is plain and easy to be accounted for;
upon any other supposition it appears an inscrutable mystery.
Place but the balance even; present to me an exposition
of these facts, that shall make your innocence not less
probable than your guilt; and, as I feel myself interested
for you and your family, and as the presumption, when
matters are doubtful, ought always to be on the favourable
side, I consent to be your friend!”
“How unfortunate,” I exclaimed, “am I doomed to be!
Your proposal is liberal and generous; but I must refuse
it! My story is an unhappy one: particulars have been
reposed in my fidelity, which I am not at liberty to communicate,
but which, if communicated, you would not regard
as dishonourable. I may be made the martyr of infamy,
and the abhorrence of my species; I can endure
adversity and anguish; I can die; but that which you
demand from me never can be confided to any mortal ear!”
“As you please,” rejoined Monluc. “The secrets of a
dead man, to be preserved after his death, and that to the
ruin of him who is their depository, must, I believe, be
villanous secrets; and the secret of a villain no one is bound
to observe. You must further give me leave to tell you,
that, whatever a high-strained sense of honour might dictate
in that point, the fortune you possess is your own affair,
and to dissipate or not the mystery which hangs upon that
is wholly at your discretion. But I have already advanced
as far, perhaps further, than circumstances or propriety
could justify, and there can now be no more parley between
us.”
[229]
“Monluc,” cried I, “I submit! However harsh your
decision is as towards me, however painful and unfortunate
its consequences, I will admit it to be that which duty prescribes
to you. I struggle, I contend, no further. One
thing only I would willingly obtain of you, that you would
interpose your influence to obtain for me the society and
intercourse of my family. The transaction of this day will
then be remembered by me with respect towards you, and
a melancholy regret that I could not entitle myself to your
esteem. I shall recollect with pleasure that I owe something
to the generosity of Monluc.”
“Incredible pertinacity!” exclaimed my visitor, with a
voice of perplexity and astonishment. “What am I to
conceive of you? Under what appearance shall I consider
you in the records of my memory? Your silence is the indication
of guilt, and in that indication I ought to acquiesce.
Yet the fortitude of your manner, and something, I
know not what, of emotion, that your manner produces in
my own bosom, would fain persuade me you are innocent.
Why will you leave me a prey to this contention of thought?
If all men, constituted as I am, were to feel in you, as it
were, the magnetism of innocence, shame, the simple inference
of understanding, and the general sense of mankind,
would oblige them to treat you as guilty. What I can
however, be assured I will cheerfully do for you. I cannot
deliver you from prison, but I will not fail to obtain the
mitigation you ask. Farewell!”
Such was the issue of my interview with Monluc. It
was clear that my reputation was wounded beyond the power
of remedy. While the question had only been of a magistrate,
haughty, supercilious, insolent and unfeeling, I flattered
myself that the harshness of the conclusions that were
drawn, might be ascribed to the depravity of his character.
But Monluc was the reverse of this man. He was not less
generous and heroic than the magistrate was gross and illiberal.
His desire to relieve me was not less apparent than
the magistrate’s eagerness to oppress. Yet his conclusion
was the same, and was felt by me so much the more bitterly,
in proportion to the humanity, the kindness, the intrepidity,
and the virtue, of the man from whom it flowed.[230]
Virtue and vice, barbarism and refinement, were equally
engaged in the concert against me, and there was no chance
I should triumph in a contention with so many enemies.
I might now be said to have reached the end of my adventure:
I had closed one grand experiment upon the
donation of the stranger. What had it produced to me?
Not one atom of the benefits I anticipated; not a particle of
those advantages which a little while ago had made the intoxications
of my waking dreams. Its fruits had been distasteful
and loathsome. Whether I looked to my person,
my family, or my fame, I had felt in all the miserable
effects of this treacherous and delusive gift. My person
was shut up in prison; and I was now to make an experiment
whether, by clandestine and secret proceedings, wealth
could restore to me the liberty of which wealth had deprived
me. My family was blasted; my wife was struck to the
heart, and no mortal skill could restore the wound she had
suffered; my son was gone unaided into voluntary exile,
that he might shun the contagion of my follies; what was
I to do with the poor remains of my house, forlorn, dejected,
and wretched? The wound my good name had
received, was of the most decisive species. When I first
encountered contumely at Dresden, and was called on for
explanation by Coligny, the difficulties of my condition
struck anguish to my soul. But what were they, compared
with what had now overtaken me? I was charged with
robbery and murder, with every thing that combines the
whole species against the perpetrator, and determines them,
without sense of compunction, to extirpate him from the
face of the earth. Perhaps it was only by the courtesy of
the laws of this state, that I was permitted my choice between
an ignominious death and perpetual imprisonment.
I might possibly indeed escape from my confinement; I
might pass into a distant country; I might be fortunate
enough to cut off all connection between my past and my
future life, and thus enter upon a new career. But this to
a man of honourable mind is a miserable expedient. With
what feelings does he recollect, that there is a spot where
his name is abhorred, where a story is told against him to
excite the wonder of the ignorant, and the torpid feelings of[231]
the sluggish soul, a story to darken with new infamy the
records of guilt, and to infect the imagination of the solitary
man with nameless horrors? To be the theme of such a
tale, is no common evil. No matter how far the man to
whom it relates, shall remove from the detested spot; the
spot itself with all its chain of circumstances, will often
recur; the voices that repulsed and humbled him will ring
in his ear; the degraded figure he made will rise for ever
fresh to his imagination. He cannot ascend to any free and
lofty sentiment; he cannot attain the healthful tone of unblemished
virtue; wherever he goes, he carries the arrow
of disgrace in his bosom, and, when he would erect his head
on high, it reminds him of the past, and stings him to the
heart.
If the consciousness of all this would have been painful
to any other man, what was it to me, who had been
brought up from my infancy in the opinion that fame was
the first of all human possessions, and to whom honour
and an unimpeached integrity had ever been more necessary
than my daily food, or than the life which that food supported?
What would I not have given could I have returned
to the situation in which the inauspicious arrival of the
stranger had found me? But that was impossible. If all
that I had recently passed through could but have proved a
dream, if I could have awakened and freed myself from the
phantoms of this horrible vision, how happy beyond all
names of happiness should I by such an event have been
made! What a lesson would it have taught me of the
emptiness and futility of human wishes! What a sovereign
contempt would it have impressed upon me for wealth and
all its train of ostentation! How profound a feeling of contentment
with humble circumstances and a narrow station
would it have produced in my mind! Alas, the conception
of those advantages and that peace was the illusion, and not
the evils I had sustained, and from which I could not
escape!

[232]
</div></body></text></TEI>
